book path: 7 Days at the Hot Corner - Terry Trueman.epub.txt
beginWordsDict: {}
readFrom: 0

quote: "It may not be fair to say, but it's my best friend Travis Adams's fault that right now I'm at the Spokane County Public Health building, sitting in an ugly orange vinyl chair. On a small white ticket in my hand is the number 23. What are the odds that when I pulled out a number from the stupid waiting-turn machine, I'd get my uniform number, 23, my \"lucky\" number? Maybe that's a good sign... but I doubt it."
quote: "The last number they called was 16, so it looks like I'm going to be here for a while. I've decided to get an AIDS test. I'm not gay; I'm not an IV drug user, either. I'm a third baseman. I shouldn't have to be worried about this stuff, and I know that it's borderline idiotic, or maybe over the borderline, that I'm even here. The chances that I have AIDS are probably low; but still, I need to find out."
quote: "This week, of all weeks, I should just be playing baseball. It's almost the end of my senior year—graduation is only a month away—and therefore it's also the end of my high school baseball career. The Spokane All-City High School Tournament starts later today. If we play well enough, and get a little lucky, we'll be in the championship game on Saturday. We've won a record-setting fourteen games in a row, unheard-of at the high school level—so really, this should be a great, amazing time. If I'm ever going to get noticed by a pro scout and get a chance to be drafted by a pro baseball team, it'll happen this week; I've gotta focus on baseball and nothing else—but instead I'm sitting in this uncomfortable chair, waiting to find out whether or not I'm a dead man."
quote: "As I went in the direction of room 105, walking like a condemned man on his way to the electric chair, my mouth felt dry. I could feel my heart pounding inside of me. I hate needles, and all in all this is not a good place to be—I don't want people thinking I'm gay and who the hell wants to find out that you might be sick and never get to play baseball again? As I walked, I also started to feel dizzy. Finally I leaned against the wall for support. My stomach flip-flopped around, sweat broke out on my forehead, and I couldn't seem to catch my breath."
quote: "\"Are you all right?\" I heard a woman's voice behind me."
quote: "I looked up to see a middle-aged lady. \"Dorothy\" said a name tag on her white nurse's uniform. Her expression was kind."
quote: "I pulled myself together as well as I could. \"I'm fine. I'm just here to have that burger-flipping thing done.\""
quote: "I muttered, \"You know, the thing you do to work in restaurants, the health card and the shot thing for handling food.\" In Spokane, if you want to work in food service, you have to get a shot. I'd planned out the \"burger-flipping\" excuse to cover my tracks for being in this building in case I ran into anyone I knew."
quote: "\"Isn't that the AIDS room?\" I asked, wondering if she knew what she was doing."
quote: "She smiled at me again, glancing back over her shoulder. \"Blood testing for HIV and hepatitis are done in the same clinic.\" She slowed her pace so that she could walk next to me."
quote: "Hearing that all the blood test stuff is done in the same area made me feel a little more relaxed. If I saw any kids I knew, I'd use my burger excuse, like I'd planned."
quote: "So Dorothy led me down here and I've been waiting ever since. In this waiting room, just outside the door marked 105, there are half a dozen other people—thankfully, I don't know any of them. I got the slip of paper marked number 23, and then I also filled out and turned in a little card, putting my number in the upper right-hand corner. When I was sure nobody was watching, I checked the box \"Reason for this visit—HIV screening.\""
quote: "That was twenty minutes ago. In that twenty minutes only number 16, and just a minute ago number 17, have been called. When that happens, you walk through the door into room 105 and disappear—no one since I've been here has come back out. Either there's some other exit or they test you, find out you've got AIDS, and just shoot you in the head right there. Just kidding... I think."
quote: "All these people, including myself, were little kids once too, like in that movie I saw, with nothing in the world to worry about. And now, on this particular day, we have all landed in this incredibly scary place—a place you go to sit and wait to get news that will change your life forever, one way or the other. Pretty heavy."
quote: "But I still think this test is a good idea for me, a necessary thing to do."
quote: "After all, it's been more than six months since Travis Adams's blood was all over my hands, more than six months that the disease could have been brewing in me."
quote: "Finally the lady behind the counter calls, \"Number twenty-three.\""
quote: "I walk through the door marked 105. After the door closes, latching behind me, another nurse greets me. She walks me down a hallway full of closed doors. About halfway down the hall we stop, and she opens one of them for me to go in."
quote: "Sitting there is the same nurse I fed the BS to about \"burger flipping\" when I first came in. I turn about ten thousand shades of red."
quote: "The nurse who led me here asks, \"Is there a problem?\""
quote: "\"Not at all, Margaret,\" the other nurse says, rising from her chair and gently touching my arm. \"We spoke in the foyer earlier, but no confidentiality breach occurred.\" She turns to me. \"I'd be happy to be your nurse for whatever kind of procedure you require, if you'd like me to.\""
quote: "\"Sure, that'd be great,\" I say, still embarrassed. I look at her name tag again. \"Thanks, Dorothy.\""
quote: "\"I'm really embarrassed,\" I say. \"I'm sorry I lied.\""
quote: "\"There's nothing to be embarrassed about,\" Dorothy says, smiling and looking into my eyes. She motions for me to sit down, and she sits across from me. \"You have your own reasons for wanting an HIV screening, and that is nobody's business but yours. Nonetheless, without telling me your name or anyone else's, would you be willing to explain why it is you believe you need this procedure?\""
quote: "I tell her everything, everything that happened to Travis and me last winter at Spencer's Batting Cages. I tell her all about that day; I've thought about it so much for the last few days that it's like it just happened."
quote: "From the street you'd never guess that there could be batting cages in Spencer's. It looks too small; but when you go in, the hallway winds back around, and in the back are three screened-off boxes with pitching machines. Even though there are only a few other batting cages in all of Spokane, there's never a wait for a cage at Spencer's. This is probably because when you're there, you feel like you're in a dungeon. The metal mesh of the cages is old and kind of corroded-looking, like it was once used to trap crabs in Alaska. The lighting sucks—just bare bulbs. The place is dirty and sweaty and gross. It stinks of machine oil and ten-thousand-year-old Deep Heat ointment. The actual pitching machines look like third world torture devices."
quote: "On a Monday after school, Travis and I went to the cages. I needed Travis's help there because between pitches he would adjust the dial on the automatic pitcher from slow to medium to fast so that I wouldn't know what was coming, from one pitch to the next. On that particular Monday I'd been hitting for about forty-five minutes and was starting to get tired."
quote: "\"You want to swat a couple, Trav?\" I asked him."
quote: "\"Come on, man, we'll set the machine on slow and you can pound a couple outa here,\" I said."
quote: "This got me juiced, because Travis hardly ever tried to hit and I always felt guilty about having all the fun."
quote: "\"Yeah!\" I hollered. \"You da man!\" I hurried out of the cage and offered my gray metal Spalding bat to Travis."
quote: "\"Hold on,\" I said, and I took off my batting gloves and gave them to him too. They were pretty sweaty but were still better than hitting bare-handed."
quote: "Travis held the bat under his arm, like he'd seen me do a million times, and slipped his hands into the blue-and-white gloves, which were several sizes too big for him."
quote: "I walked over to the dial and set it for slow pitches as Travis settled, pretty uncomfortably, into the batter's box. This wasn't the first time he'd ever hit, but he hadn't taken any cuts for quite a while, and it was fun to see him at least trying it again."
quote: "The first pitch, traveling about 30 mph, zipped across the plate at knee height, and Travis took the weakest little bailing-out kind of swing you've ever seen."
quote: "\"It can't hurt you, Travis,\" I said, instantly wishing I could once in a while keep my know-it-all mouth shut."
quote: "\"I know,\" Travis said, getting ready for the next pitch. When it came, he made a much better swing and almost hit it. \"You were a little high on that one,\" I told him. He nodded."
quote: "Travis smiled and got set for the next pitch, which he also hit decently. I could tell by his expression that he was having fun."
quote: "After a few more good hard hits, Travis started to swing even harder, until finally he took a massive cut at one, missed it, and spun a full 360 degrees, right down onto his butt."
quote: "I managed not to laugh, but when Travis looked up, he was already laughing. Then we both noticed that his nose and mouth were covered in blood."
quote: "\"Geez,\" he said as the batting gloves turned red, blood dripping from his nose like it was coming out of a faucet. \"Sorry,\" he muttered. I pressed the stop button on the pitching machine and hurried into the cage. Travis, still laughing, said \"Sorry\" again, holding up my batting gloves for me to see."
quote: "\"Don't be an idiot,\" I said. \"I don't care about my batting gloves. Are you okay?\""
quote: "\"I got a bloody nose,\" Travis answered. \"How'd that happen?\""
quote: "\"You swung too hard,\" I said. \"I think the bat smacked you in the face when you fell.\""
quote: "\"Geez,\" Travis said, still laughing. \"That's impossible, isn't it?\""
quote: "Travis interrupted me. \"Okay,\" he said, tilting his head back, trying to slow down the blood still dripping from his nose. \"I got it, Mr. Baseball. Am I all right?\""
quote: "\"Sorry,\" I said, and without giving it a thought, I reached across to Travis's mouth and gently lifted up his lip to see how badly he was hurt. I wanted to be sure that all his teeth were still in place. His nose was bleeding from both nostrils, and his upper lip had a tiny cut and was already getting puffy. Blood covered his mouth and chin."
quote: "\"Are ma teeh okay?\" Travis slurred as he tried to talk around my hands."
quote: "\"Yeah, I think so,\" I said, still running my fingers across his gum line to make sure that there were no sudden gaps. \"You're okay,\" I reassured him. \"You're gonna live.\""
quote: "I felt guilty; like it was my fault he'd hurt himself because I'd pressured him into the cage in the first place. \"You're a mess, though,\" I said."
quote: "I looked down at my hands and there was blood all over them; I held my fingers out, all crinkled, and pointed them at Travis. \"I vill drink your blood,\" I said, trying to sound like Dracula."
quote: "He laughed at that one and even more blood dripped from his nose. It took us a while longer to finally stop his bleeding."
quote: "Dorothy, the nurse, listens quietly as I explain, nodding once in a while, but the look on her face doesn't give anything away about her feelings."
quote: "After I've told the story, she nods and smiles and then says, \"It's true that HIV is transmitted through direct blood contact—and most frequently that involves an open wound or tear in the flesh or through sharing an unclean hypodermic needle with someone who has the virus—or by an exchange of fluids through sexual contact.\""
quote: "\"I'm not gay,\" I blurt out. It's important to me for her to know that if I have AIDS, I didn't get it because of sex stuff—at least not gay sex."
quote: "I add, \"And I don't do any drugs at all.\""
quote: "\"That's good,\" Dorothy says. \"Has your friend told you that he is HIV positive?\""
quote: "\"No...\" I say. \"It's just...\" I can't think of how to put it."
quote: "\"Yeah,\" I say. \"I mean, even the trainers on our baseball team wear rubber gloves when they wrap ankles or wrists, and that isn't even about blood, right? But they're still being careful. Plus I have other reasons to be worried, and my team is on a run at the city championship—it's the most important thing ever.... I just can't be distracted by this thing right now. I hope to someday get drafted to play pro ball and...\" I don't finish this sentence. I feel stupid even saying it, as the chance of my getting a call from the pros is probably slim or none."
quote: "Dorothy looks a little confused by my rambling explanation, but at least she doesn't ask me about the \"other reasons.\" Instead she questions me some more about the blood at the batting cages, and I explain about it again."
quote: "I hold out my hands, sweaty palms up. Wearing white plastic gloves, she turns my hands over and stares at them intently. \"You bite your nails a bit, huh?\""
quote: "My head reels again, and I feel even more dizzy than I did earlier, out in the foyer. The room begins to spin. I drop my head down between my knees to keep from passing out and falling off the chair."
quote: "\"Whoa!\" Dorothy says, putting her hands on my shoulders and steadying me. \"You all right?\""
quote: "\"Breathe deeply now.\" Dorothy's voice calls to me from somewhere. \"Steady, easy, breathe deeply. Come on, you're going to be fine, take it easy.\""
quote: "I follow her directions, and soon the room stops spinning. I sit back up in my chair."
quote: "\"Not at all,\" Dorothy responds. \"That's not true at all.\" She pauses until I look at her."
quote: "\"That's not accurate,\" Dorothy says, her voice calm and reassuring. \"Many people, not knowing that their partners were HIV positive, have had unprotected sex with those infected partners for years without contracting the virus at all. Based on what you've told me about your history, you have a very low risk factor. I wouldn't even recommend an HIV test for you at this time.\""
quote: "\"What?\" I can't believe she is serious. \"What about my fingernails? What about all that blood?\""
quote: "\"I can see how worried you are,\" Dorothy answers softly. \"If you want to have an HIV screening, I'd be glad to do the procedure. If you think it would make you feel better, I'm glad to help.\""
quote: "\"Yeah,\" I answer. \"I don't wanna keep worrying about it.\""
quote: "Dorothy smiles again and says, \"Okay, roll up your right sleeve.\""
quote: "The procedure is no big deal. Just a regular blood test, I guess. I look in the other direction, not wanting to see the needle go into my arm. Dorothy must have done millions of these, because I don't even feel it. I honestly don't even know she's stuck me until several seconds after she's finished, when she says, \"Okay, that's it.\""
quote: "\"You're done?\" I ask. \"I didn't even know you'd started.\""
quote: "Settling back in the chair, I take over the little cotton ball that Dorothy presses against the pinprick. It stings a little, but nothing too bad; now for the scary part. I take a deep breath and ask, \"Can you look at it right away? I'd like to get the results before I leave.\""
quote: "Dorothy half smiles and says, \"I'm sorry, but it takes five business days to get the results back.\""
quote: "Dorothy looks at me sympathetically. \"I know that these seven days are going to feel like years, but here in Spokane there's just no way for us to do the test any faster. I'm sorry.\""
quote: "I take a couple of deep, slow breaths so that I won't get dizzy again. \"Seven days,\" I say softly to Dorothy."
quote: "\"Counting today, yes,\" she says, \"but I'm sure the news will be good.\""
quote: "Ahhhhh!! All I ever wanted to do was play baseball, and now I'm trapped at a hot corner that's real different than just playing third base."
quote: "How did my life change so quickly? Everything was so good, and then blam!"
quote: "That's when Travis Adams moved out of his parents' house and in with my dad and me. He wouldn't say exactly what it was his folks were so upset about that he'd had to leave their home. He seemed pretty upset himself. He showed up at our door on a Thursday night at about eight o'clock with a suitcase. He asked Dad if he could stay with us."
quote: "\"For tonight?\" my dad asked, not so much inviting Travis in as getting out of the way; I can't remember the last time Travis rang the doorbell at our house."
quote: "\"Yeah, for tonight,\" Travis answered Dad. \"Tonight and maybe some more nights too.\""
quote: "\"Yep,\" Travis said, looking away from Dad, down at the floor."
quote: "I know that later the same evening Travis's dad, Roy, phoned my dad and they talked about what was going on, and that Travis's parents said Travis had their permission to stay with us \"for the time being.\" Actually, because he's seventeen years old, Travis can live pretty much anywhere he wants—that's the law in Washington State—but I knew he didn't leave his parents' house on his own, and my dad wouldn't tell me more."
quote: "A couple of times since he moved in, I tried to get Travis to talk about what was going on, but he kept saying, \"It's kind of private. I'd rather not discuss it.\""
quote: "The first time I met Travis was right after the weekend my dad moved out of our house, a few days after my parents told me they were getting divorced. I was really scared. Travis was new to my school. We were second graders, standing near each other at recess, and out of the blue, like the total wack job I was that day, I just blurted out, \"Are your parents married?\""
quote: "He looked at me kind of funny, but answered, \"Yeah.\""
quote: "He said, \"Oh,\" looking at the ground before looking up and adding \"Bummer.\""
quote: "Then I said, \"You know, if one of my parents just died or something, everybody would feel sorry for me.\""
quote: "Travis nodded his agreement, as if what I'd said wasn't pretty nuts."
quote: "We were quiet awhile, and then he said, \"When they get divorced, though, you'll get twice as many Christmas presents.\""
quote: "Travis said, \"In our church, this girl, Ashley Anderson, her parents are divorced and she said she gets twice as many presents for Christmas and her birthday because her mom and dad feel so guilty or something.\""
quote: "I thought about it a second and said, \"Cool.\" Then I thought more about what I'd said about Mom or Dad dying. \"It's not like I wish my parents were dead.\""
quote: "I said, \"I'm just saying that if one of them died, it'd be easier than a divorce. I hate it.\""
quote: "I started to get some tears in my eyes then, so I looked away from Travis so he wouldn't see."
quote: "He said, \"You can borrow my parents any time you want. You can pretend they're your parents too, if you wanna.\""
quote: "I asked, \"Really?\" even though it seemed like a pretty goofy idea."
quote: "Travis said, \"Sure, I don't care. I've already got one brother anyway—why not have another one?\""
quote: "We both laughed then. And that was the first time I'd laughed since I'd heard that my own family was blowing apart."
quote: "The very next Saturday, Travis and I went together to try out for the first organized baseball I ever played; actually it was T-ball. I was great at it. Trav wasn't. My first time at bat I smacked the ball off the tee and watched the kids in the outfield chase it as I legged it out a triple. From that moment on I was in love with baseball and I've never looked back."
quote: "So Travis and his mom and dad have actually been in my life as long as baseball has. Somehow, Roy and Rita kicking Travis out of their house changed everything—I just couldn't get my brain wrapped around it. I couldn't imagine what Travis could have done for such an impossible-seeming thing to have happened—until yesterday, when he handed me a copy of an article that appeared today in our high school newspaper."
quote: "I asked, \"Are you saying your folks threw you out 'cause you're queer?\""
quote: "Travis said, \"Gay.... Yeah, they said they didn't want me around my little brother anymore—like he might catch it or something.\""
quote: "\"Wow,\" I said, unable to think of anything else at that moment."
quote: "\"Gay, huh?\" I asked him, unsure of what to even say. \"Why didn't you ever tell me before? Why'd you bring this up now, of all times?\""
quote: "\"Margo and I were talking,\" Travis said. \"It just kind of came up, and I didn't feel like lying anymore.... Sorry if the timing isn't perfect for you.\""
quote: "He sounded pretty sarcastic with the thing about timing, so I said, \"Kind of came up?\" not even trying to keep the annoyance out of my voice."
quote: "Travis looked at me and said, \"I'm not trying to hurt you or your dad or anybody. She was asking about my being out of my parents' house, wanting to write a story for the paper about kids who get kicked out. She asked me what was going on, and I just told her the truth.\""
quote: "I couldn't think of how to ask the next question, but Travis seemed to read my mind. \"She's not gonna tell anybody that I'm the guy in the article. She gave her word.\""
quote: "\"I don't get it, Travis. How could you tell her before you even told me?\""
quote: "Travis stared into my eyes and answered, \"Are you kidding me? Tell you? Yeah, right.\""
quote: "I felt my ears start to burn. \"What's that supposed to mean?\""
quote: "I heard my voice go up. \"I'm reacting fine—what's your problem? I mean, it's cool, you telling her. You did what you had to do, right?\" I hoped my words sounded genuine enough, but my heart was definitely not behind them. Really, I wished the whole thing would just disappear."
quote: "Although I tried not to let Travis see, I started to feel more and more freaked out. \"I can't believe you're gay,\" I said, looking up at him for about half a second before I looked away. He didn't seem any different, but something was changing between us; at least for me it was. \"Are you sure you are?\" I asked, staring at the floor and feeling kind of stupid."
quote: "\"Yeah,\" Travis said. \"Course I'm sure. You think I'd tell you if it was a 'maybe'?\""
quote: "\"I don't know,\" I said. I felt embarrassed and not in control. \"I just...\" I couldn't think of what I wanted to say or ask. \"You can't be gay—it just doesn't fit,\" I finally mumbled."
quote: "\"That's not true,\" I said, thinking how completely true it really was; if something is not about baseball, I'm usually not that interested. Still, the whole gay thing, to use a baseball cliché, was definitely coming at me from out of left field."
quote: "I said, \"I guess, yeah, but I thought you were just... I don't know... shy or something.\""
quote: "Travis said, \"Do I seem shy at any other times?\""
quote: "I answered, \"I don't know.... No, I guess not.\""
quote: "\"I'm not shy, Scott; I'm gay,\" Travis said."
quote: "I asked, \"How long have you known this about yourself?\""
quote: "Travis said, \"Since I was, like, six or seven maybe.\""
quote: "\"I can't speak for straight people,\" Travis said softly, \"but I've always known I was different. It's just the way I am. I tried to pretend it wasn't true, but for as long as I've thought about sex, I've known it.\""
quote: "\"Why?\" I asked. \"I mean, do you know why you're gay?\""
quote: "\"No,\" Travis said. \"It's just the way it is, who I'm attracted to. I couldn't change it even if I wanted to, which I used to want.\" He paused a moment, then looked at me and spoke clearly. \"But not anymore.\""
quote: "I didn't know what to say to him, didn't know what he wanted or needed from me."
quote: "\"I'm fine,\" I answered, trying to catch my breath."
quote: "I just blurted out, \"Do you have safe sex?... Could I have AIDS?\""
quote: "Travis looked at me like I'd just kicked him in his stomach. He said, \"What do you mean? You and I never had sex.\""
quote: "Just hearing him say it made me sick. \"Yeah, of course not, I know we didn't, but what about that day you bled all over me at Spencer's Batting Cages?\""
quote: "At first Travis looked confused, but then he remembered. \"That was way last winter.\""
quote: "Travis, actually sounding upset, asked, \"You think I wouldn't mention something to you if I thought there was any risk?\""
quote: "But he was already mad. \"What kind of friend do you think I am?\""
quote: "I shot back, \"I don't know. I guess a gay one?\""
quote: "We sat through another awkward silence, and it felt like Travis was reading every negative thought in my mind; he said, \"You can't handle this.... I didn't think you could.\""
quote: "Stalling, because I didn't know what to say, I muttered, \"What?\""
quote: "Travis said, \"You heard me; I knew you'd react this way. My being gay doesn't fit your imaginary view of the world.\""
quote: "\"Look how you are, man—baseball and bullshit—you think everything is the way you wish it were, when really nothing is!\""
quote: "Travis, blushing, snapped back, \"You never will, Scott, not as long as you live in fantasyland, a wonderful world where baseball is more important than anything or anybody, where my parents are perfect and your parents are not because they got divorced, where I have to be straight to be all right with you, and... man, the list is endless.... Fantasyland!\""
quote: "\"Fuck you!\" I yelled, surprising myself by how loud I said it. \"You never trusted me to handle it before, you never gave me a chance—\""
quote: "I felt frozen, unable to say anything more. We just sat there in another long silence. If he said another word, I'd want to beat him up; he probably felt the same way toward me."
quote: "Travis didn't smile back and he didn't say another word."
quote: "I'd said it was cool, but it wasn't then, and it sure isn't now."
quote: "That conversation was yesterday, and we haven't spoke ten words to each other since."
quote: "After my AIDS test today, when I get home, the house is quiet. I go straight to my room."
quote: "Travis is lying on my bed when I open my door. He's been sleeping on the couch downstairs."
quote: "I answer, \"No, I'm good—I just gotta grab my stuff for the game.\""
quote: "I'm not about to admit to him that I was at the Public Health building, getting an HIV test, not after how he acted before, so I say, \"Just out, getting gas—nothing much.\""
quote: "I'd like to ask him if he's heard about anyone figuring out that he's the guy from the \"Coming Out\" article—that's what is really on my mind, but I don't know how to ask it without him getting upset again. Thinking this actually makes me kind of mad. So I'm mad that he's mad. Nice, huh? Real mature."
quote: "I look at him lying there on my bed, lying on his back, with his arm up over his face, his elbow covering his eyes, like he's trying to take a nap."
quote: "I feel a sudden urge to just go over and punch him."
quote: "We won our game yesterday. That makes fifteen in a row. Joe DiMaggio, Shoeless Joe Jackson, Ty Cobb, Babe Ruth, and every other baseball god and legend are smiling down on me right now saying, \"Keep it rollin', rookie!\""
quote: "But I haven't been at school for five minutes this morning when I hear a big uproar behind the gym, near the student parking lot where I've just parked. I'm opening the black storage box on the driver's side of my truck cab when I see three kids running, with another kid following right behind them."
quote: "\"What's going on?\" I ask the kid lagging behind the others, moving as fast as his short legs will carry him."
quote: "\"There's a fight!\" he pants excitedly. \"Somebody's beatin' up the gay kid.\""
quote: "Travis! I toss my books in my truck bed and take off running after the others."
quote: "When I round the corner, I'm still fifty feet or so from a circle of what looks like a hundred kids. I can't see inside, but the kids watching are silent. It's so quiet that as I run toward the circle, I can hear the sickening sound of a fist smacking into flesh."
quote: "I feel a buzz of adrenaline, mixed with a killer dosage of anger and fear. I'm sure that when I get to the middle of the circle, I'll see some big, dumb, vicious Neanderthal beating up Travis."
quote: "As I get closer, I hear another punch land and the crowd give a soft gasp."
quote: "\"You're the fag!\" a voice comes from the ground off to my left. It isn't Travis's voice, but it's familiar. For a second I can't quite place it, but then the kid who has spoken gets up and I see that it's Zeke Willhelm."
quote: "I ask the kid next to me, \"What's going on?\""
quote: "\"Every time that big guy hits that little guy, the big guy says, 'Say you're the fag,' and the little guy gives him the finger and says, 'You're the fag.' Then the big guy hits him again.\""
quote: "I watch for a few moments and it's just the way the kid described. Zeke isn't punching back. But he keeps bobbing and weaving so that most of Floyd's punches aren't landing very cleanly and they don't seem to be hurting him much. Zeke has an incredibly stubborn look on his face and an attitude that screams, Hit me again, take your best shot, I'll never give up! Floyd sees the finger sticking up in his face and looks pissed. He swings at Zeke, landing a weak grazing shot across the right side of Zeke's face. Zeke barely budges when it hits him."
quote: "\"Say you're the fag,\" Floyd says, but his heart isn't in it. He's getting his butt kicked by somebody who isn't even throwing a punch."
quote: "\"Okay,\" I say, stepping into the circle. \"That's enough; come on, cool it.\""
quote: "\"He's the fag,\" Floyd says to me, breathing hard, trying to sound tough but obviously sick and tired of the fight."
quote: "\"I don't really care,\" I say back. \"What difference does it make to you?\""
quote: "As my question registers, Floyd, surprised, says, \"What?\" looking at me as though he might punch me, too."
quote: "\"Take it easy, Floyd. Come on, it's over,\" I say in a low, nonchallenging voice."
quote: "For a second it looks like Floyd will punch him again. But instead he grabs at the chance to just walk away, shrugging his shoulders and moving through the crowd as if nothing has happened."
quote: "\"He said I was 'the fag' and wanted me to admit it,\" Zeke says, suddenly sounding tired and sore. He touches his lip, which is puffy, and the side of his face where it's darkening into shades of reddish blue. \"He kept wanting me to say I was the gay guy from the article or to deny it. I wouldn't do either.\""
quote: "\"You're not gay,\" I say. \"I've seen you with your girlfriend—you two look like rabbits in heat—why not just say so?\""
quote: "Zeke looks at me, disappointed. \"Come on, Latimer,\" he says, \"think about it. That Floyd guy is an idiot and a bully, gettin' all wigged out over whether somebody's homosexual or not, and he's not the only one. I wouldn't do anything a guy like that ordered me to do—nothing! Much less take the credit for being brave enough to admit something so personal in the school paper.\" He pauses a moment and looks around at the ground, then spots his skateboard and walks over to it. He stamps down on one end of the board and it flips up into his hands. \"Whoever that gay kid is, he's got a lot of guts; he deserves not to have to be afraid of jerks like Floyd. That kid's sexual thing is nobody's business but his own!\""
quote: "Even though Zeke and I have never been friends—I mean, he's a skate freak and I'm a jock, water and oil—as I watch him walk away, I remember something about him I haven't thought about in years. One time in seventh grade I was at the NorthTown Mall and Zeke was over in a corner of the parking lot trying to master this trick where he'd jump the skateboard up onto a curb, slide along sideways for a few feet, then jump the board back off the curb without ever dismounting. It looked impossible. I'd finished baseball practice and had gone over to the mall to wait for a ride home from my mom. I sat on the side of one of those raised flower-bed things and watched Zeke for maybe twenty minutes. I was a good two hundred feet away from where he was; he didn't even notice me. He kept trying and trying to do the trick, never making it. He'd slide along and go crashing off. He never fell hard on the cement, but he came close to killing himself almost every time. Looking back, I guess it was really kind of cool. I mean, he was practicing the same way that I practice baseball, just trying to master a skill by repeating it over and over until it becomes automatic. I remember thinking at the time that Zeke was an idiot for trying so hard to do a stupid trick on a stupid skateboard. But now I realize that skateboarding for Zeke is just like playing baseball for me."
quote: "And as Zeke walks away, I think about what he just said about the whole gay thing and I realize that I actually agree with him. What's up with Zeke Willhelm being a better friend to Travis, even if it is incognito, than I am, when they're not even friends?"
quote: "I'm thinking about the hot corner again, about how hard it can be to play it straight up and right, to know that rocket shots may be coming your way at any instant and that the best you can do is stand your ground, which may not be enough."
quote: "Word of the fight is getting around school the way these kinds of stories always do, bigger or smaller than reality but with everybody having an opinion about what happened, especially kids who weren't even there."
quote: "Zeke is a total skate-head and already a mild legend of sorts within his group of friends for his amazing skate tricks. But now he has become an instant hero in a lot of kids' minds. Floyd, whose social stock was already a couple of hundred points below zero, hasn't really been hurt by what happened, and in his own mind and that of the gay-bashing population, he probably feels okay too. In reality, looking at the whole thing, \"the fight\" was pretty much of a draw."
quote: "After the film, Mr. Robinette starts the discussion. \"It wasn't only the Jews that Hitler persecuted and killed. It could be anybody who wasn't an Aryan.\""
quote: "Robinette smiles at him and answers. \"Something like that. An Aryan, according to Hitler and the Nazis, was a person of pure blood and superior racially to all others. Unless you agreed with the Nazis, went along with their plans and views, you were likely to end up in either a work or a death camp. Jews, political opponents, and anybody perceived to be an enemy was subject to arrest and worse. Although Hitler started out by targeting Jews, it ended up that anybody who didn't agree with him was in trouble. Eventually, Hitler lumped jobless people and the mentally ill and retarded people and gays all together as 'undesirables.'\""
quote: "Robinette pauses a second and then says, \"I know there's been lots of buzz around school recently as a result of the article in the school paper about homosexuality. In Nazi Germany, Jews had to wear a Star of David on their coats so everybody knew they were Jews. At the concentration camps, gays had to wear a pink triangle.\""
quote: "Zeke Willhelm, fat lip and all, still basking in the glory of getting beaten up, says, \"If you didn't like somebody, you could just accuse them of being a Jew or gay and the Nazis would take care of them for you, right?\""
quote: "Mr. Robinette says, \"Yes, that happened a lot. But what I hope we can focus on today are the ways, sometimes less obvious and sometimes not, that unequal treatment is still alive. The Nazis' forcing people to wear identification was a blatant, in-your-face example of this, but I'd like you to think about the ways people show their prejudices now—these are perhaps more subtle but are still hurtful. We brand people we're afraid of just as much today as before, not with badges like the Nazis did, but by fear, gossip, and innuendo.\""
quote: "This all makes some sense to me until I glance around the room and make the mistake of looking at Matt Tompkins. Matt plays first base on our team. Teammates are supposed to be friends, and I am friendly with most of the guys, but with Matt it's impossible—for me at least. Matt Tompkins is big, strong, and real quiet. He always has been, even from when we were in the seventh grade. He's been in classes with Travis and me all through our middle school and high school years. He's always gotten by on his bigness and strength and athleticism, but he's a real private guy, and way too serious. Even in baseball he never seems to be having fun. The truth is, I've never liked him and he's never been a friend. We just don't get along."
quote: "And right now he's in the back row where he always sits; his jaw is tight and tense, working overtime. He is staring at Robinette. In his expression is a look of horrible concentration, like I've seen on him only in real tough situations on the ball field a few times. Once when we were playing Kettle Falls, they had a guy on third and two outs in a game we led by one run. Both Matt and I, him at first base and me at third, were told to play way up, to prevent a squeeze play (where the batter bunts and the base runner on third charges home). Of course, there's a danger to playing only twenty feet back from home plate. If the batter swings away, which he almost has to do because you're so close that the squeeze play won't work, there's no way you can get a glove up in time to defend yourself. I remember that day, glancing at Matt for just a second, and wondering if he felt as scared as I did. It so happened that the batter took a called third strike, but Matt didn't look afraid, just tense and angry, like he looks right now."
quote: "Matt's glare suddenly shifts to me. He stares straight at me and looks sort of crazy. I feel my stomach flip-flop, and I look away from him as quickly as I can. What's going on? Why is Matt Tompkins staring at me?"
quote: "The final bell, ending the last class of the day, rings and I'm sitting in biology, completely bored—somehow photosynthesis just doesn't cut it with so much else going on."
quote: "I'm thinking about the huge pile of negative garbage in my head, when I realize that there is one person I've always been able to turn to when I'm really confused. I've got two hours before our game this afternoon, so I'm going to go visit Travis's mom, Rita. I miss her, and who knows, maybe she'll help me make some sense out of this whole thing."
quote: "Maybe I can even talk her into letting Travis move back home (even as I think this thought, I have to admit that I feel a little guilty—some friend huh?)."
quote: "As soon as school gets out, I hop into my pickup and drive the mile and a half to Rita and Roy's house."
quote: "I walk in the door and yell hello, and Rita hollers back \"Travis?\" from the back of the house—I think the kitchen. It freaks me out, her thinking I'm Travis."
quote: "\"No,\" I answer, \"it's Scott. Can I come in?\""
quote: "Actually, I'm already in, and as I finish asking, Rita rounds the corner from the kitchen to the dining room and sees me."
quote: "\"Hi, Scott,\" she says, walking right up to me and giving me a big hug. She forces a smile and looks uncomfortable."
quote: "I hug her back and smile a phony smile too."
quote: "\"How are you?\" she asks, staring into my eyes, then pulling away from me but still holding my upper arms."
quote: "Rita is a great mom. She always teased and kidded with us, took us to Wild Waters, the water slides over in Coeur d'Alene, during the summer. From when we were little, she always had cookies around, good kinds, too, for snacks."
quote: "We walk across the living room, and I sit on the couch while she sits in a little rocking chair right near me."
quote: "I feel like saying, How could I be all right? But instead I answer, \"Yeah, I'm good... kinda stressed.\""
quote: "There is a short, awkward pause; then Rita, ignoring my comment, asks me point-blank, \"How's Travis?\" Her face looks old and sad now."
quote: "\"It's all right, Scott,\" Rita says, reaching over and patting my knee. \"It's okay.\""
quote: "Rita takes a deep breath, then speaks in a real soft voice. \"We just don't know how to deal with this thing.\""
quote: "I say, \"I know. It's so weird, really.\" Saying this feels lame to me, and stupid, but nothing else comes to mind."
quote: "\"I'm not gay, Rita,\" I blurt out, feeling my whole head turn bright red."
quote: "\"Of course you're not,\" Rita says. \"Neither is Travis.\""
quote: "\"No,\" I insist. \"I mean I'm not gay; Travis and I aren't a couple or whatever you call it...\" She doesn't seem to be listening to me. I say, \"How could you even think that?\""
quote: "I feel crazy. I want to scream at her, I want to holler, just like I did at Travis, but instead of saying anything, I just sit here, burning up with embarrassment."
quote: "Now that Rita thinks Travis and I are some kind of gay twosome, everything has changed. Roy and Rita live in this nice, pretty house and she bakes cookies and he goes off to work, but when their son really needs them, they're not here for him. And they're definitely not here for me either."
quote: "Sitting in the Adamses' living room, I look at Rita and feel—I don't know exactly how to describe it... still embarrassed about her thinking I'm gay, but mostly... I hate to say this, but mostly I feel ashamed of her for what she's doing to Trav."
quote: "Nothing she's said helps any of it make any more sense. I feel depressed. I'm so disappointed in her, and maybe in myself. Mainly, though, I feel awful for Travis. Nobody in his family is on his side."
quote: "\"Of course, Scott,\" she says with another fake smile. We walk in silence to the door, where she gives me another awkward hug."
quote: "She looks me in the eyes as we finish hugging. \"Tell Travis that we...\" She pauses, and the tears I saw a few minutes ago come back. \"Tell him that I'm sorry, but with his little brother here, until he can figure out how to be... until you guys realize...\" She pauses again and finally just says, \"No, forget that; just tell him we miss him and that I'm sorry.\""
quote: "I nod my head numbly. \"Sure, Rita,\" I say, trying not to show how sick I feel. I just want to get out of here. My chest hurts and my palms are wet."
quote: "\"Up yours, Travis,\" I whisper to myself, but I realize that I don't really mean it anymore."
quote: "After talking to Rita, I feel terrible, even worse than before. Thank god I've got a game in an hour. Thank god for baseball."
quote: "Still, I have to admit it, the rest of life at school is happening too. But it's been three days since the \"Coming Out\" article hit the newsstands at Thompson H.S. Three days since my HIV test. So far as I can tell, nobody has ID'd Travis, nor has he gone any more public. Truthfully, the excitement caused by the article has quieted down a little bit. Although the question of Who's the gay guy? is still a semi-hot topic in the cafeteria and hallways, mostly it's not angry, more like just curious."
quote: "It's just before our game today. I've been hoping that the whole gay thing has maybe died away completely, but as we're changing, getting suited up, Willie Brown, our second baseman, and Tom Archer, our left fielder, joke about the article."
quote: "\"It's not one of you guys, is it?\" Matt Tompkins asks, gruff and serious."
quote: "\"Not me,\" Tom says, laughing, \"but I think Willie might be yer man.\""
quote: "\"That true?\" Matt asks, turning toward Willie and squaring up."
quote: "I feel a tiny rush of appreciation for Josh's speaking out against antigay stuff until he speaks again."
quote: "\"The fact is,\" Josh adds, his voice cool and certain, \"homosexuality is a sin against God and nature. We should feel pity for gays and try to help them get better whenever we can. I feel sorry for that kid in the article, whoever he is.\""
quote: "Everybody is quiet. I want to say something, but what words would I use? If I speak up, what will everyone think of me? I know I don't agree with him. If my dad were here, he'd make Josh look and sound like an idiot. But I'm not my dad."
quote: "Before I have a chance to say anything, Matt speaks up again. He says to Josh, \"Whatever you say. But don't let me catch any of you guys playing fag...\" He interrupts himself and grudgingly corrects, \"Playing gay crap with each other around here. Whatever anybody does in private is their own business, but keep it private or you'll have to deal with me.\""
quote: "My ears are still burning, my head is reeling; as I lace up my spikes and run out onto the field, I wonder if I'm going nuts."
quote: "Right now, though, I'm playing more like \"the boy in the toilet\"! In our first three games of the tournament my batting average is .233 (3 for 13), more than a hundred points below my regular season average and about one measly base hit above the Mendosa line, a numerical zone below which baseball players disappear like dinosaurs in a tar pit. I'm not able to hit anything that doesn't come straight over the plate, fast. Pitchers are not stupid. They just keep throwing me off-speed junk, curves and sliders and changeups. When I do get a fastball, I'm so completely screwed up that I might as well be swinging one of those little twelve-inch toy bats they sell as kiddie souvenirs."
quote: "I know that the stuff going on in my life outside of baseball is having an effect on my play. At least, that's the excuse I'm making for myself, but it's gotta be partly true. For instance, Travis and my dad sat up in the bleachers yesterday and again today, watching me play. They looked ridiculous—a real Hallmark-Kodak moment. I kind of hated them for it—nice, huh, being mad at Dad and Trav for being there to support me?"
quote: "I'm not as good a person as my dad is. Lots of kids I know talk like they hate their parents, but to be honest, my dad is pretty cool. He and my mom have always shared custody of me, although I spend more time with him, Monday through Thursday. This is partly because he lives in town, where school and all my friends are, and partly, to be honest, 'cause he's less strict than Mom."
quote: "But seeing Travis sitting there with Dad in the stands today reminded me of what Matt was saying about the secret gay kid. The thing about Matt that's always bugged me is that, though he's usually quiet, when he does say something, it never feels quite right to me, never feels like he's saying what he really means; I can't explain it better than that, but I don't trust Matt."
quote: "In the locker room I grab all my gear as quick as I can. I want to get home and warn Travis about what Matt was saying before the game today."
quote: "I pull into the driveway and go into the house. I go up to my room, where Travis is sitting at my desk studying."
quote: "\"Yeah?\" he says, sounding a little pissy but turning toward me."
quote: "I ask, \"Aren't you worried about kids putting the whole 'unknown gay' thing together with you being kicked out of your parents'?\" I know I sound like a jerk, but I don't have the patience for politeness."
quote: "\"I don't really care,\" Travis says. \"You're the one who's worried about that.\""
quote: "\"Come off it,\" Travis snaps, staring straight into my eyes. \"You haven't talked to me for how many days now? Is this your idea of being a friend?\""
quote: "I look right back and say, \"Hey, pal, that's a two-way street. You said some pretty mean stuff to me, you know. I'm sorry I've been kind of a jerk, I feel bad, but I've—\""
quote: "Travis turns back to me; his expression looks horrible, like I just kicked him in the 'nads. \"You did what?\""
quote: "Suddenly I feel really uncomfortable, ashamed or guilty or both. \"That wasn't okay to do? I mean... I wasn't trying to... I just—\""
quote: "Travis interrupts, tears in his eyes. \"What did she say?\""
quote: "I say, \"She said to tell you she loves you.\""
quote: "Travis looks away and tries to nonchalantly wipe his eyes. He says, \"Oh, yeah?\""
quote: "Travis takes a couple of slow, deep breaths and then stares back down at his book and says, \"I gotta do this trig.\""
quote: "I say, \"Okay,\" glad to have an excuse to get out of here. \"I'm sorry about talking to your mom.\""
quote: "Travis doesn't say anything, just pretends that he's studying again."
quote: "I quietly leave the room, realizing that I never even told him about Matt Tompkins—but that will have to wait; I'm not going back in there right now."
quote: "I go downstairs and walk into the kitchen. Dad has gotten home, and when he sees me he asks, \"You doing okay?\""
quote: "I say, \"Not really,\" and then, speaking softly, I add, \"I wish Travis would move out.\""
quote: "I tell Dad why Travis has been living with us for the past couple of weeks. Dad listens and nods and says, \"Yeah, both Travis and his dad talked to me about this already.\""
quote: "\"Don't you think it's kind of weird, all this stuff?\""
quote: "\"I don't know, Scotty,\" Dad says. \"Not really. It's just life.\""
quote: "\"Scott,\" he says quietly, \"Travis is your friend and I don't care what his sexual preference is—that's his business, not yours or mine or anyone else's. Besides, it's not really about 'preference' anyway—nobody chooses who they're attracted to, so 'preference' isn't the right word—it's just about who Travis is.\""
quote: "I say, \"Roy and Rita obviously don't feel that way about it.\""
quote: "Dad says softly, \"I know.\" Then he looks away from me and says even softer, \"And that's a shame.\""
quote: "I swear this whole gay thing doesn't amount to a pimple on the butt of the universe to my dad."
quote: "We're quiet for a few seconds, then finally I admit, \"I'm tired of this gay stuff, I guess. Every time I turn around, I'm scared that somebody will think I'm queer too. I'm sick of it.\""
quote: "Dad seems to see this and he backs off. \"It's been a tough thing for both of you, Scott. I know that, but there's nothing to get.\" His voice is softer and real understanding. \"Travis is gay, but he's still your friend.\""
quote: "I say, \"I know that, but...\" I can't even find the words for what I feel."
quote: "I tell him about the fight at school, how scared I was that it was Travis getting beaten up; I tell him about what Matt said about \"the gay guy\"; and I explain a little about the arguments Travis and I are having and how bad that feels. I almost tell him about the batting cage and blood and all that, but I hold back—if the news there is bad, there'll be time later for us to discuss it."
quote: "I say, \"I'm not like you, Dad. I just can't be calm about this.\""
quote: "He smiles and says, \"You're a good person, son, a great person. And this is all part of growing up, as clichéd and simplistic as that sounds—it really is.\" Then he adds, his voice gentle, \"But a lot of this stuff really has nothing to do with Travis being gay—you know that, right?\""
quote: "Dad puts his hand up to his chin and strokes his beard gently. I see the wrinkles around his eyes; I notice how old his hands look and the white hairs in his beard and at his temples. Dad's always seemed big and strong to me; he still does, even though I'm now taller than him."
quote: "He takes a slow, deep breath, and then says, \"Trav doesn't have anyplace else to go right now.\" His tone is soft and reasonable. \"He needs us to be his friends, Scott.\""
quote: "I say, \"Yeah, I know that. I don't even really want him to leave, but I don't know how to handle this. It's like he's a different person now. I know he isn't, but that's how it feels.\""
quote: "Dad says, \"Maybe you should spend the next couple of days out at your mom's, give both you and Trav a little breathing room.\""
quote: "I can tell that Dad isn't saying this like a threat, or because he is mad at me. He just wants me to know that if I want to go to my mom's house to stay tonight, on a day that I usually spend with him, it won't hurt his feelings. Dad has to have noticed the tension here too, both Travis and me tiptoeing around each other, avoiding eating dinner together, doing everything we can to keep our distance."
quote: "I think about Dad's suggestion to go to Mom's place, realizing that I haven't even spoken to her since all this stuff started. \"Yeah,\" I say, \"that'd be good.\""
quote: "It's ridiculous, you know, a guy still liking a hug from his dad at my age—but ridiculous or not, it feels good."
quote: "I feel better, not all the way better, but better. I finish a Raspberry Twister, then go upstairs and take a quick shower. I come back downstairs, ready to head to Mom's place."
quote: "The M's have lost, but somehow I don't care. After saying good-bye to Dad, I take off."
quote: "There's a Safeway right around the corner from my house, and I decide to run in and grab a snack for the drive out to Mom's. It's not that far, but I kind of need a junk food rush."
quote: "But because my truck is bright yellow, I think a lot of kids know it's mine, and as I pull up and park, I see a couple of ninth-grade girls I recognize from school watch me get out and walk into the store."
quote: "I'm standing at the chips rack, trying to decide between Cheetos and Doritos, when the two girls approach me. I don't even notice them until they're right next to me. They're only frosh and real young-looking."
quote: "The taller of the two, a blond girl, asks, \"Aren't you on Thompson's team?\""
quote: "I smile and say, \"Don't let the tennis, golf, or track-and-field guys hear you say that.\""
quote: "They both laugh, and the blonde says, \"We read about you in the paper this morning.\""
quote: "The shorter girl says, \"You guys are awesome; you play third base, huh?\""
quote: "I smile again. \"Yeah, I do. Have you guys been coming out to our games?\" Kind of a stupid question, but I can't really think of anything else to say."
quote: "\"Yeah,\" they both say again, nodding their heads at the same time."
quote: "They look so incredibly young to me, more like sixth graders than high school girls. But they're cute, and someday they'll be the kind of girls who would refuse to even glance at me at a dance or something. Right now, though, they look all starry-eyed and happy."
quote: "I make my junk food decision and reach for the Doritos, a medium-size bag, when the blonde suddenly asks, \"Can we have your autograph?\""
quote: "I look at them closely to be sure they're not kidding. Nobody has ever asked me for an autograph before, and it seems ridiculous, but they look sincere."
quote: "I say, \"Come on, why would you want my autograph? I mean, we go to the same school, right?\""
quote: "The shorter girl speaks right up. \"You're gonna be famous someday.\""
quote: "The blonde says, \"You're already famous! Your name is in the paper today.\""
quote: "I say, \"Yeah, it's in the box scores every day too, but—\""
quote: "\"No,\" the blonde interrupts, \"it was in the article about Thompson. You're Scott Latimer, and it said you're one of the best players on the team.\""
quote: "I feel myself blush. \"We've got a lot of good players—I'm just one of the guys.\""
quote: "\"Next year you'll be a big league player—you'll get like five million dollars a year or something.\""
quote: "I keep myself from laughing and say, \"The stars get that. Not regular players—\""
quote: "The short girl interrupts me. \"No,\" she says. \"The stars, like A-Rod of the Yankees, get twenty-five million dollars a year—but some pitchers, even guys with ERA's over five, still make millions.\""
quote: "I laugh, surprised that she's so smart about baseball. I say, \"That's true, but anyway, there's no guarantee that I'll even make the pros.\""
quote: "\"You will,\" the blond girl says. She asks again, \"Will you give us your autograph, please?\""
quote: "Seeing that they're serious and feeling my face turn redder than the Doritos package in my hand I say, \"Sure, I guess.\""
quote: "They both smile and clap their hands. The shorter girl pulls out a Sharpie and two pieces of paper from the back pocket of her jeans, like she had this autograph thing all planned out ahead of time."
quote: "She asks, \"Will you make them to Angela and Davita?\""
quote: "I say, \"Sure,\" taking one more glance at them to be certain this isn't some kind of practical joke. I look around to make sure some joker isn't watching and laughing at the end of the aisle. But the coast looks clear, and the girls seem to be completely into it. I have to ask how to spell \"Davita\" and then I sign my first-ever autographs."
quote: "The shorter girl, Angela, says, \"Good luck with the rest of the tournament—I know you guys are gonna win it.\""
quote: "\"Thank you!\" the blond girl says, and stares into my eyes. I glance back, and suddenly she says, \"You're cute.\""
quote: "Davita quickly says to her friend, \"I'm sorry.\" Then, turning to me, she says, \"But you are.\""
quote: "I blush even worse and look down at my Doritos. I say, \"Thanks.... It's nice meeting you both. See you out at the games.\""
quote: "Angela grabs Davita and begins to pull her away, saying, \"Yeah, we'll see you there. Forgive Davita, she's brain damaged, one too many foul balls off her skull.\""
quote: "\"Shut up!\" Davita says to Angela, then looks back at me, staring into my eyes again. \"See you.\""
quote: "Back in my truck driving to Mom's, for the first mile I feel really happy and full of myself."
quote: "I'll make the pros and be rich and happy and..."
quote: "I freeze. If I honk my horn, it might run into the path of a car and get killed; if I jump out and try to stop the traffic or grab the cat, it might get scared and run anyway. The only thing keeping it alive this second is that it's just sitting still; but how long until a car drives too close to the middle line and runs it over? None of the other drivers seem to even see it. I don't know what to do! Just when I don't think I can stand it for another second, the cat shoots off across the street, heading away from me. Two cars drive right toward it, but by some miracle, some totally perfect bit of luck, they miss it. The last I see of the cat, it's running through a gas station parking lot, leaping up, and clawing its way over a wooden fence into the backyard of a small house."
quote: "The whole rest of the drive out to Mom's, I feel worse and worse, absolutely stupid and worthless."
quote: "Mom's house at Weaver Lake used to be Mom and Dad's place before I was even born. We all three lived there together until I was four and they split up. For several years after the separation Dad would stay overnight sometimes and they \"tried to work things out,\" until they finally gave up for good and got the divorce. And that divorce changed everything forever—at least for me it did."
quote: "Although the town is also called Weaver Lake, Mom's house is right on the lake itself, twelve miles southwest of Spokane. I pull my truck into my parking spot next to the fence and look out at the wind gently playing across the water. Against my will I say to myself that Weaver Lake would be as good a place as any to lie around and die of AIDS. I gotta knock this off; I don't even know if Travis has ever had sex with anybody before, much less whether he's infected. I've been acting totally stupid."
quote: "I think about how sad I was back then. I can see the old sandbox where I played as a little kid, the boards all weathered and splintery now from so many years exposed to the winds from the lake. I remember how young my mom looked back when we built the sandbox, how big and strong and invincible my dad seemed. I remember him lifting me up and flying me around the yard like I was Superman. I swear I can almost see the outline of his footsteps in the grass."
quote: "I look out past the huge old pines in our yard, down to where the waves wash silently onto our beach. And suddenly I start crying. Not just a little teary-eyed boo-hoo, but the real thing. I'm sobbing so hard that it hurts my chest and ribs and drives me to the floor. I can hardly catch a breath. I lie here in the studio all alone on the floor and I cry and cry. I'm ashamed and totally embarrassed. But the weirdest part about this crying is how good it feels, so good and so terrible. I lie here and I think about all those atbats when I couldn't hit the ball to save my soul; I think about not being able to talk with Trav and not really being there for him when he needs me. I think about when I was a little kid wondering why my parents stopped loving each other."
quote: "My crying is so heavy that my body aches. I wrap my arms around myself to keep from flying apart. I can't breathe. I feel like I'm drowning."
quote: "After a while I finally get control of myself. It feels like something has lifted off me, like kicking off a heavy blanket when you're mostly asleep but way too hot. My head hurts a little and my body still feels sore—actually, \"trashed\" is more accurate—but somehow I feel better. In fact, I feel the best I've felt in days. Actually, I feel a tiny sense of peace. I don't know why, but I just do."
quote: "When I'm recovered enough so that maybe Mom won't be able to tell I've been crying, I walk down to the house from the studio."
quote: "We have two dogs, Evander and Bob, who charge up the yard to meet me. Despite the common wisdom on the subject, having dogs has never done anything much to help me grow up. The truth is, Mom has always done more of the work of taking care of them than I have. She feeds them all the time I'm at Dad's and most of the rest of the time too. She cleans up the dog crap because, honest to god, it makes me gag to do it. Despite my complete worthlessness when it comes to doing my fair share with the dogs, I really love them. It's embarrassing how much I baby them, and how I talk to them, calling them moronic nicknames like Baby Bobbie and Pretty Girl. If Matt Tompkins heard me with the dogs, he'd be sure he'd found the girly-boy."
quote: "\"Are you hungry? Can I fix you something to eat?\" My mom is exactly the kind of person who, up to her elbows in dishwater, asks me if I'd like to dirty some more dishes."
quote: "\"It's such a treat to have you here on a Thursday night,\" Mom says. \"I can't think of the last time you were out here on a Thursday—\""
quote: "She stops right in the middle of her sentence the second she looks closely at my face for the first time since I came into the room."
quote: "\"What's wrong, Scotty?\" she asks, staring into my eyes."
quote: "I try to smile at her. I walk across the kitchen and plop down onto the big overstuffed couch that runs along one wall of the kitchen–dining room area. From here I can talk to Mom and look out the windows at the lake."
quote: "Where do I even start? With Mom, actually, anyplace will do. I ask, \"Have you heard about this stuff with Travis?\""
quote: "Mom says, \"Well, what? I'm sorry, I don't know what you're asking me.\""
quote: "I ask, \"Do you think I live in a fantasyland all the time?\""
quote: "Mom says, \"Actually, that thought has never occurred to me. Do you?\""
quote: "Mom asks, \"But he said that when you two were quarreling, right?\""
quote: "\"Yeah,\" I answer. \"Right before I screamed 'fuck you' into his face!\""
quote: "\"Scotty!\" Mom's not a big fan of what she calls \"the F word.\""
quote: "\"Sorry,\" I say. \"Yeah, we were arguing—he was for sure mad at me.\""
quote: "My palms are sweaty and I feel my heart pounding hard, but I decide to just spit it out. \"He said that I treat you and Dad like you're not great parents because you got divorced—he said it like anybody who knew me would think that I felt that way, and that it's fuck—sorry... that it's messed-up that I think that.\""
quote: "I answer right away. \"No, not at all—I don't know why he'd think that or why he'd say it.\""
quote: "Mom says, \"You two were arguing; people say lots of things when they're angry.\""
quote: "I say, \"Yeah, and I was being pretty hard on him about the whole 'gay' thing—I couldn't help it.\""
quote: "Mom says, \"You know, honey, relationships change—people change and our feelings for one another change too, but this tension with Travis shouldn't be something that ruins your friendship.\""
quote: "Mom says, \"It sounds like you've been under a ton of stress lately.\""
quote: "I say \"Yeah,\" but a thought is growing inside me, something Mom and I have never talked about."
quote: "Without even knowing I'm going to say it, I just blurt out, \"Why'd you stop loving Dad?\""
quote: "Mom stops washing the dishes and looks at me. \"I still love your dad, and I'll always love him, just not in the ways that let us share our lives together—not like a wife needs to love her husband.\""
quote: "I've always been confused about how my mom and dad can be so nice to each other, such great friends, but weren't able to keep our family together."
quote: "I ask, \"Why didn't you and Dad stay together, like Roy and Rita—why couldn't you do that for me, for our family?\" As I hear myself ask this question, I realize it's something that's been inside me since I was seven years old, but it's a little kid's question and one that Mom just answered—she still loves Dad, just not in the ways that would let them stay married."
quote: "Mom is quiet for a few seconds. Then she says, \"Your dad and I love each other as friends; we were in love once, but our ways of loving each other changed.\""
quote: "I remember, now, something Dad once told me back when he and Mom first split up. I was seven then, and Dad was tucking me into bed at our apartment, the first place we lived after he moved out. I asked him, \"Can't you two get back together?\""
quote: "\"Sorry, buddy,\" Dad explained, \"it doesn't work that way.\""
quote: "\"Can't you make her love you?\" I asked. (Hey, cut me some slack, I was only seven.)"
quote: "Dad answered, \"You can't make somebody love you, Scotty. Love has to be felt and then given—it's a gift, not something you can demand.\""
quote: "When I looked at Dad that night, I saw tears in his eyes—I knew how sad he was, how hurt he felt. Thinking back on it now, remembering how sad my dad was, I know that's the reason he and I have never talked about it since—I've never wanted to see him so sad again."
quote: "She looks at me, and there're tears in her eyes too. \"God no, Scotty, that's the furthest thing from the truth—why would you think that?\""
quote: "I try to answer. \"I don't know why, I always just thought it....\" I'm unable to finish my thought. \"I just don't know why, I—\""
quote: "\"Really?\" I ask, and for the first time since I was seven years old, I maybe believe it."
quote: "I take a couple of deep breaths and we're quiet."
quote: "Finally I say, \"Things have changed for me and Travis. I'm not sure how to be friends with him anymore, and I feel guilty.\""
quote: "Mom says, \"Change is always scary and hard—but to love someone, you have to really know them. Travis has been afraid to be himself. Now you see the real Travis, so you can be a real friend to him, and him to you—if you let him.\""
quote: "I nod and force a smile, but I think about all the stuff that's been going on with Trav. How can we get back to being friends? I wonder if he's thinking the same thing."
quote: "Okay, that's enough of that. I have to try something other than just sitting around feeling scared."
quote: "Suddenly I know exactly what I need to do. I say, \"Hey, Mom, I'm gonna go up to the studio and use the computer.\""
quote: "In truth, it's not studying I want to do. I gotta Google \"AIDS+HIV+third+baseman+who+gets+all+chickenbutt+for+no+reason\" and see what I come up with."
quote: "Time to stop being an idiot, a self-centered, bad friend, and a wimpy wuss! Time to do some serious work on my attitude."
quote: "For the last two games, the custodian and the kids on the grounds crew who help him have added a full set of additional bleachers on the third-base side, right next to the regular ones. The success of the team has helped take people's attention away from everything else."
quote: "It's funny, though; I can't help but feel that Matt's been avoiding me, too. I haven't allowed myself any eye contact with him, so I can't be sure, but as I've passed him in the halls going to and from classes, he completely ignores me. Whatever is up with him, I don't really care, so long as he stays away from me... and from Trav. Yeah, I'm a hypocrite—it's okay for me to hurt my friend, but nobody else better!"
quote: "As school comes to an end today, the pressure over our game this afternoon is worse than it's ever been before—it's against the team with the next-best record to ours in the league!"
quote: "Now, lowering the glove from my face, I take a few deep breaths and try to relax. Hey, it's a baseball game, not a tsunami in Indonesia, not a hurricane on the Gulf Coast, not an exploding troop transport in Iraq—it's just a baseball game."
quote: "Turns out we are up 9 to 2 by the third inning. Of course, with a cushy lead we are playing loose again, laughing and clowning around. It's a perfect day. The sky is ninety percent blue, with only a couple of white, fluffy clouds. We have a huge crowd. The grounds crew has added a third set of bleachers down the left-field line and a second set down right field. Whatever number of seats the ground crew sets up, every seat is taken. Even more fans, mostly kids from school, sit on the grass where the bleachers end. Dad and Travis have come to today's game. I'm not worrying about them. I'm trying to concentrate on the game itself."
quote: "By clowning a little during the game, we aren't meaning to be disrespectful to our opponents. Butler H.S. is a good team; it's just so much fun to be way ahead and not feel so much pressure."
quote: "I once saw Major League fastball pitcher Randy Johnson bean a guy. Everybody could tell Randy was real upset, and that it was an accident. Nobody came out to fight or anything, because everybody knew that it was unintentional."
quote: "The brawl is as ugly as any I've ever been involved in. Our catcher, Mark Trilling, is the first guy out of our dugout, followed by all the rest of us. Butler's guys meet us at the mound and the fists start flying. Sometimes in baseball, fights are just jokes, but an intentional beaning like this eliminates any possibility of one of those pick-a-partner, dance-around deals. Trilling aims a major right hook at the Butler pitcher's mouth. If the punch had landed squarely, the kid would still be on his knees looking for his teeth."
quote: "The fight lasts a good five minutes, which is a long time for a fight. I get lost under a pileup and spend most of my time just trying to protect myself from feet and fists coming at my face. It's scary. I finally manage to claw my way out from beneath three or four bodies and get back on my feet. I am up just in time to see Matt Tompkins do one of the nastiest, most vicious things I've ever seen."
quote: "He backs himself quickly across the infield to where the pitcher who beaned Willie is trying to hide out. Because Matt backs toward him, I'm sure the kid has no idea what's coming. When Matt is right in front of him, his back still to the kid, he cocks his arm high and swings his elbow with all his might. It connects with the pitcher's face. Matt has made it look like an accident, but I've seen his eyes as he sets it up, moving himself into position, picking the perfect moment, and then striking. The results looks like a stunt in a movie, the way the kid's nose just explodes with blood. The kid drops, holding his face, blood flowing freely from between his fingers; he is too hurt to even moan."
quote: "When order is finally restored, the Butler pitcher doesn't have to be tossed out of the game, because he is so messed up with a broken nose that he can't return anyway. Our catcher, Mark Trilling, is thrown out. Willie, still a little shaky from the beaning, is okay; he even stays in the game."
quote: "I admit I have a temper. At my dad's, twice I've smashed the remote control for our TV, first the original and then the seventy-dollar replacement, when the Mariners lost games they should have won. I'm not proud of this—in fact, after I lose control, I always feel ashamed of myself. But after watching what Matt did today, I could tell that he was never out of control. He wasn't like I get when I go nuts. He was very methodical, very cold. At no time did Matt ever look like he was mad. To me, that makes him even scarier."
quote: "The game gets really sloppy after the brawl. We make four errors. Even Captain Josh drops a fly ball on a fairly tough try, but it's one he makes ninety-nine out of a hundred times. Matt makes two errors, on easy grounders. Still, we hold on for the win. Personally, I have a great game; I don't have any errors and I get four hits and bring home five runs."
quote: "It's a relief to contribute so big-time today. I've made only one error in the last six games. But more important than my defense, which has been good all year, today I hit again. I hit fastballs, of course, but I hit the off-speed stuff too. Actually, I hit everything! I'm in the zone. I've raised my season batting average back up to .340, with a total of eight home runs and twenty-one RBIs."
quote: "We win, but we win ugly. What a nasty baseball phrase that is, \"winning ugly.\" To me it means that none of the good stuff about winning made any difference—not skill, not talent, not the fact that you work hard, play hard, or deserve to win, not even being lucky. Nope, winning ugly is actually more like not even winning. You have more runs on the board at the end of nine innings—but is that the reason you play? It's actually just another form of losing; somehow, winning ugly is like my argument with Trav, because being right doesn't matter all that much. I can't explain it any better than that, but winning ugly is not a good thing."
quote: "I haven't spoken to him since our World History class. And after the crappy game he played today, I have no intention of saying anything now. But as I'm finishing getting my stuff together at my locker, I feel him staring at me. I make the mistake of glancing over."
quote: "\"Listen,\" Matt says, his voice low and cold. \"I know about your little buddy. You just stay away from me.\""
quote: "I knew it! I start to say, \"I'm not ga—\""
quote: "But he interrupts. \"I don't care what you are—just shut your mouth and stay away from me!\""
quote: "I realize that no matter what I say, it won't help, so I shut up. Matt's always been the opposite of me. I wear my feelings pretty much right out there; with Matt, you can hardly ever tell what's going on inside him—so him saying this stuff feels dangerous for both Travis and me."
quote: "Normally, Coach insists that we be at the field an hour before a game, but our game today isn't like any we've ever played before—this game is the championship, so we're supposed to be in two hours before the first pitch."
quote: "I drive by Dad's house and there's no one home. I go by the Five-Mile Espresso, where Travis and Dad and I used to go for Saturday-morning donuts after Friday-night sleepovers; no luck there either."
quote: "I cruise by Roy and Rita's house, my stomach doing a small flip-flop, but neither Dad's nor Travis's car is in the driveway or parked on the street."
quote: "I glance at my watch and I'm already twenty minutes late."
quote: "I grab my cell and dial Travis's cell again. It picks up on the first ring and I leave him a voice mail. \"Listen, Trav, I know this is gonna sound strange, but stay away from Matt Tompkins today, okay? I'll explain after the game.\""
quote: "There's nothing more I can do now except hope that Travis checks his messages and that he doesn't run into Matt anywhere this morning. There's not really any reason why Trav would see Matt, and I've done all I can do. I have to set that aside and start focusing on the game; the most important game in my life, in any of our lives."
quote: "I drive to Hart Field for our one-o'clock start time."
quote: "Parking my truck in the already packed parking lot and seeing the size of the crowd already here, over an hour and a half before the first pitch, I realize that this game, the big one, for all the marbles, is going to be something else."
quote: "Everybody in the Western world seems to be here. I don't actually know how many people are watching; maybe it'll say on the news tonight. All three local TV channels, 2, 4, and 6, have sent out their main sports guys, the ones you see reporting sports every evening at five and eleven. All I know for sure about the crowd is that it is so big that the umpires had to have the grounds crew rope off the left- and right-field foul territories all the way to the center-field fence. They also made a bunch of kids who were hanging over the fence in center field move so they weren't directly behind the pitcher. There are more people watching this game than I've ever seen at a Thompson H.S. basketball or football game, which is pretty amazing. It's packed."
quote: "I'll admit that as much as I love baseball, it can be boring sometimes if you don't know what's going on; in fact lots of times it's not very exciting. But if just once you get into a game as important as our game today is, and if it turns out to be a great one, you'll never see baseball the same way again."
quote: "We start out falling behind by two runs in the top of the first inning as Priest River, the other team, scores. In the bottom of the first, Josh Williams walks and then steals second. He makes it to third on a sacrifice fly to shallow right field; the play is real close with a great throw by their right fielder and an even greater headfirst slide by Josh. We get a run of our own when Josh scores with two outs on my single into left."
quote: "In the second inning, nobody scores but both sides make some incredible defensive plays. Alex Turner, our right fielder, who is usually pretty weak with his glove, makes a diving catch into the crowd, where he knocks over about four fans. During the bottom half of the inning, Priest River's shortstop, a little guy, only about five foot four, makes two unbelievable plays on balls that look like sure base hits; one to his left and one to his right."
quote: "Good pitching dominates the next four innings as our pitcher, Phil Coyle, settles down and strikes out five of the next thirteen guys he faces, giving up only one harmless single. Their pitcher does an equally good job. Good pitching can be boring, but these guys are working fast—and with a score of 2–1, and our winning streak, and the league championship riding on the outcome, the crowd's really into it."
quote: "In the seventh and eighth the offenses get going again for both teams. We take our first lead of the game in the bottom of the seventh, only to have them come back and score in the top of the eighth. Going into the last inning, the game is tied 5–5. Priest River scores the go-ahead run in the top half of the ninth inning on a two-out home run by their third baseman, a tall, gangly kid with a good glove who hasn't had a base hit all day. Their team goes wild; they pour out to greet the kid who has hit the dinger and mob him. I know I should be all depressed and down, but I can't stop smiling. The winning and losing thing just doesn't matter that much. If somebody is going to beat us, I'm glad it's their guy at third base—their hot-corner man."
quote: "We get the final out in the top of the ninth and are back in our dugout. I walk up and down the line kind of laughing and chattering it up with our guys. I am doing like \"Hum baby, hum baby, come on...\" as if we're back in Little League. Several of the guys start laughing along with me, doing \"Hum baby, hum baby\" too. It's like we are all eleven years old again, playing rec-league ball, and nothing matters but having fun. They are up 6–5, but we have one more chance!"
quote: "I'm due up fourth. Allen Smitter, our second baseman, leads off the inning. He walks up to the plate and drives the first pitch hard up the middle for what looks like a sure base hit until that incredible little Priest River shortstop makes another absolutely fantastic play, diving from out of nowhere to snag the ball and throw Allen out by two steps. Our coach, Mr. Trefts, pinch-hits Brad Collins for our pitcher, and Brad works a 3–2 count into a walk by fouling off two potential third strikes. Next up, batting just in front of me, is Matt Tompkins. Matt is one for three with a single in the fourth inning. He's our best power hitter, but he also leads the team in strikeouts and at hitting into double plays. If Matt can get on base or at least stay out of a double play, I'll get to hit. I'll either be the hero or the goat. My adrenaline pulses through me."
quote: "An incredible crack of the bat interrupts my fantasy broadcast. Matt hits a one-hop dart right down the third-base line, where Priest River's third baseman, the hero of the top half of the ninth, is hugging the line. There is no doubt that they can turn a double play to end the game—Matt hasn't even gotten out of the batter's box when the ball smacks into the third baseman's glove."
quote: "\"Foul ball,\" the umpire calls and signals, spreading his arms out wide. Even from my spot in the on-deck circle I can see the crease in the dirt, two inches foul, five feet in front of third base."
quote: "If Matt strikes out, we'll be down to our last chance, down to my last at bat. I want it. I have played hard and practiced my whole life for this moment. A part of me is scared, but lately I've faced much bigger fears!"
quote: "Matt takes a pitch, high and in for a ball, then another one low and away. Two balls and one strike. That count favors Matt, but their pitcher has pitched us well all day."
quote: "I need to clear my head, forget about failure and winning and losing, and just relax."
quote: "I look up toward the bleachers, up into the seats, hoping to catch a glimpse of my dad or mom or Travis. I need to escape from the pressure. I take a couple of slow, deep breaths and whisper, \"Hum baby, hum baby,\" to myself, getting ready; I even smile—"
quote: "The ball clears the fence by a good fifty feet. Home run!"
quote: "I watch Matt trotting around second base and I realize that I'm being a jerk, a jealous jerk at that."
quote: "I remove my batting helmet and by habit drop my gloves into it. My bat lies on the ground at my feet; the metal donut ring is still wedged onto the barrel from my warm-up swings. Gloves, helmet, bat—if I don't get a call-up from the pros, this will be the last time I'll ever use this equipment. Matt is the hero, not me. How is that fair? But even as I ask myself the question, I laugh at how stupid that is—\"fair\" hardly ever has anything to do with what happens."
quote: "I walk out to join the rest of the team at home plate."
quote: "The umpire behind home plate, getting jostled by the crowd, finally gets out of the way, giving up on the idea of watching Matt touch home. This game is over. My baseball career is probably over too. Oddly, it feels all right—actually it feels almost good."
quote: "The second Matt jumps up and lands with both feet on home plate, he is lifted onto the shoulders of dozens of crazed kids, some teammates, some classmates. They carry him off for a trip around the diamond again. I give up on the idea of trying to congratulate him—the crowd is too wild and he wouldn't care anyway. In the middle of that mob, though, I see the two girls from the Safeway. I can't remember their names—oh yeah, the taller, blond girl is Davita; I think that's right. The girls are helping carry Matt, the hero, on his victory lap. This is his moment."
quote: "I look across the white chalk running up the first-base line, and standing waiting for me are my dad and mom and Travis. Mom comes over and gives me a big hug. \"I'm so proud of you,\" she says. Dad hugs me too and adds, \"Good game, great game, you guys were magic out there.\""
quote: "He steps tentatively toward me, smiling and putting his hand out for me to shake. I take his hand and use it to pull him close. I give him a big hug. It feels good, like it always used to feel when we were little and we'd wrestle with my dad, or as we got a little older and we'd be on the playground and score a winning goal or touchdown and we'd jump up and down and grab each other; it feels just right."
quote: "\"Thanks,\" I say, still holding my friend close. \"I'm sorry,\" I add softly. I feel really emotional, my throat tight and my hands kind of shaky. But it feels great to be able to apologize and mean it. \"I'm so sorry,\" I say, \"for being a jerk, for not being a better friend, for not—\""
quote: "He interrupts me. \"Hey, we're cool. We can talk about all that later. Let's just enjoy this.\" I look into his face and he is smiling too. He's right; we're in the middle of a gigantic party, so it's definitely party time."
quote: "We both laugh and pull away from each other, and do a fairly successful high-five."
quote: "At about this moment the crowd carrying Matt on their shoulders sets him down to a huge cheer at home plate. Matt looks deliriously, out-of-his-skull happy. He waves his arms over his head to the hundreds of fans still in the stands, and they cheer wildly again."
quote: "\"I better go congratulate him,\" Travis says, pulling away from me."
quote: "I haven't heard his words clearly, or his message just doesn't quite register in the chaos and excitement of the moment. Before I realize what's happening, Travis is walking straight toward Matt."
quote: "A rush of fear, backed by a jolt of adrenaline, blasts up my spine and into my head, exploding!"
quote: "Eventually, the chaos and wildness and fun begin to ebb a little. The crowd thins out, and my mom and dad have gone."
quote: "Travis walks back up to me, smiling as he approaches."
quote: "\"Jesus,\" I whisper to him quickly. \"Didn't you get my voice mail?\""
quote: "Travis says, \"No, I forgot my phone at your dad's.\""
quote: "I say, \"I thought you were going to get killed just now.\""
quote: "\"Matt Tompkins\"—I'm still whispering—\"knows it was you in the school paper. I tried to warn you before, and again a minute ago when I couldn't get to you—\""
quote: "Travis laughs and puts his hand on my shoulder. \"Tryin' to rescue me, huh?\" he says. \"Matt's known for a couple of years, Scott.\""
quote: "\"Years?\" I ask, stunned. \"Why would you tell Matt Tompkins before you told me?\""
quote: "I don't get it. \"Well then, how'd he know?\""
quote: "Travis smiles at me patiently. \"That's secret, Scott. Matt's got his own reasons for needing to keep it that way.\""
quote: "\"Matt?\" I ask, suddenly grasping what Travis is saying, completely surprised. \"Big, tough, rough Matt?\""
quote: "\"What'd you think,\" Travis says with a laugh, \"that we all become hairdressers?\""
quote: "I feel myself blush, but I smile too. \"Matt,\" I say once more, shaking my head."
quote: "Travis blushes. \"Yeah, but you probably shouldn't call him that.\""
quote: "Travis is telling me how important it is to protect Matt's secret. \"I get it,\" I say. Then I add, \"I've been thinking a lot about the stuff you said to me, about fantasyland, about how stupid I can be—\""
quote: "Travis interrupts me. \"Scott, I was out of line. I'm sorry I said that—\""
quote: "I interrupt him, \"No, you were right, about all of it—I have a lot of stuff to work on, but I will.\""
quote: "Travis says, \"I was angry, but you know how much I care about you.\""
quote: "I say, \"Yeah, I know—me too... but...\" I can't think how to say it, stumbling as I try to find the right words."
quote: "But Travis laughs loudly. He says, \"Believe me, Scott, you're the least gay guy I've ever met. We're friends, man—best friends, but just friends. I hope we always will be.\""
quote: "We stand together for a while without talking, but not like it's been for this last week, not uncomfortable and bad—more like it always used to be."
quote: "\"I gotta go,\" Travis says. \"Are you staying out at the lake tonight with your mom?\""
quote: "\"Yeah, she's expecting me. Come on out with me—the dogs miss you.\""
quote: "\"Nah.\" He laughs. \"This is the last Thompson High game of the season. Your dad's gonna need somebody to help him survive toxic baseball withdrawal.\""
quote: "I smile and say, \"You're right; thanks for filling in for me.\""
quote: "\"Sure.\" Travis laughs again. \"I'll see you Monday at school.\""
quote: "I'm back out at Weaver Lake. It's dark, getting late. The dogs, Evander and Bob, are asleep on the floor of the studio. I'm lying in my sleeping bag in the sleeping loft. Looking out, I see the light from the kitchen window of the house. The moon is shining down on the lake. A few crickets are chirping, and I can smell the fresh-cut grass."
quote: "A few months ago, back in early March, a month before the baseball season even began, Travis was out here for the weekend with me at Weaver Lake."
quote: "On that Saturday morning he and I walked Evander and Bob out around the lake, like we'd done on so many other Saturday mornings before. As we got to the edge of the woods and could look out and see the wheat fields ahead, Bob started a weird, low growl, and the hair on his neck rose up. Evander, who had been padding along ahead of us, stopped, then hurried back to join Bob and began to growl too. My first thought was \"skunk,\" which is usually the nastiest thing you can run into out here. But as I looked ahead more closely, I saw what had set Bob off. It was a small herd of elk."
quote: "\"Look, Trav,\" I whispered excitedly, although there was really no reason to whisper—they were a good 150 yards ahead and the wind was blowing toward us, so they wouldn't catch our scent. There were five of them. They were at the edge of the lake; a couple of cows were drinking, the other grazing. The bull was a big one with a huge, handsome rack, and the three cows were full-grown too. A calf stood near one of the cows, not a newborn but still small."
quote: "Travis softly said, \"Wow.\" We leashed up the dogs and, shushing them as best we could, moved slowly toward the elk."
quote: "\"We'd better not get too close,\" I said. The bull looked more and more massive the closer we got. Even the cows, with a calf to protect, could be dangerous."
quote: "I'd never seen elk in the wild before. I knew they were around, but they're hard to spot. Some hunters buy elk tags every year for twenty years and never even get to fire a shot."
quote: "We walked toward them as close as we felt was safe, about fifty yards out of the woods. We were close enough to run back to the trees if they charged us. With the dogs, I knew we'd be okay so long as we weren't caught in the open."
quote: "We watched them for twenty minutes, maybe longer. When they'd had their fill of water and grazing, they walked slowly off across the field toward the bigger woods farther west."
quote: "That morning there was still even a little ice on the lake, and a small, filthy patch of snow at the foot of a craggy ledge where the sun wouldn't reach until later in the spring."
quote: "That was only a few months ago. This evening, after hanging out with Mom, I walked Evander and Bob back out to where Travis and I had spotted the elk. Of course there were no elk to be seen, and the ice and snow are long gone. In other ways, too, it feels like there's nothing left of that morning with Travis—like the whole world has changed, all for the good. Everything that's happened these last days, everything I remember from my whole life, feels valuable and worth remembering."
quote: "It's great how sometimes, when you let yourself, you can remember the things that make you the happiest, the things that make you feel... I don't know what you'd call it.... Peaceful, I guess."
quote: "The days are getting much longer now, so even though it's close to nine P.M. by the time I get back to the studio and ready for bed, there's still a little bit of light on the western skyline."
quote: "Ten minutes ago the sun was coming through the smudged glass in streaks, oddly shaped shafts of light cutting through the pines and the leaves of the locust trees. Now the sun is low enough, and it doesn't shine directly through the windows anymore. The light is softer. At moments like this, life feels perfect—like nothing bad can ever happen."
quote: "I get my test results back tomorrow, but as worried as I've been about it, now I'm not all that nervous. Whatever the news, it'll be what it'll be and I'll deal with it."
quote: "My ride into town is quiet, just the hum of my tires over the road. I can't think of any music I want to hear. I'm still thinking a lot about everything that's happened over the last week. And, of course, I feel a little bit nervous. Who wouldn't? But in a strange way, the fear is all right."
quote: "As I park my truck and approach the building, there is one thought, one image that keeps playing over and over again in my head. Although I didn't even think about it a single time this last week, with so much going on, right now I can't stop remembering that young mother with her little boy who was here the day I got my blood drawn. She was real worried-looking, and her kid, who was totally unaware of what was happening, was wild and rambunctious, a little shortstop in the making. What's gonna happen to those two if their results come back bad? I mean, I've got my parents, Trav, my teammates, and a whole world of support in my life. What happens to the thousands of moms and little kids all over the world who have nothing like the love I get every day, if their tests come back bad?"
quote: "The last time I was here and I saw that mom and her little kid, I said that seeing them creeped me out. That's not how I feel anymore. No, thinking about them now, I just feel sad and worried."
quote: "I get called into Dorothy's office. As she's telling me my results, something in her face, a kind of sadness just under her smile, makes me realize how it must be for her when she has to tell somebody the opposite news of what she's telling me right now."
quote: "I thank her for about the tenth time, and then I stand up to leave. Suddenly, without planning to do it, I reach over and hug her. She hugs me back, and it feels nice."
quote: "I walk out a locked door and down a short hallway."
quote: "When I get out the door to the outside, I run to my truck as fast as I can, almost tripping over a big bulge in the sidewalk where a tree root has pushed up and cracked the cement. I unlock my truck door, hop in, and peel out, my wheels throwing gravel up behind me as I race away. It takes me a couple of blocks to settle down and start breathing normally again."
quote: "My seven days at the hot corner are finally over. Now all I've got to do is figure out what to do with the rest of my life."
quote: "I've been trying to decide what to do with my life—community college or get a job? Dad's given me the rest of July to take it easy and make my decision."
quote: "But when I look in the mailbox today, there is a letter for me."
quote: "Without moving from the mailbox, I read and reread the letter about twenty times. I'll start in triple-A ball at the Twins' club in upstate New York, the Rochester Red Wings, but first I actually get to join the big club for spring training next March in Arizona, the Cactus League!"
quote: "I can hardly believe it—I reread the letter another half dozen times."
quote: "I can't wait to call Travis, who has his own apartment now, so that he can help me celebrate!"
quote: "Playing baseball takes a certain amount of guts and skill. Remembering that simple fact is enough for me after everything that happened last May."
quote: "Always, I am indebted to my family—my sons Jesse and Sheehan, sister Cindy, and Garren—so many Eggers that my sales are always brisk, including our favorite fellow travelers Wally and Kathy, also Bill and Nora, Peggy and Neil, Judy and Bill, Kathy and Jim Rudolph, Aunt Kay and her wonderful kids... like I said, too many to name, but thanks to all of you."
quote: "I'm bound to leave out someone, so I might as well leave out a lot of you and just give this inadequate group thank-you to all not mentioned who support me. But thanks especially to the schools and libraries that continue to so vigorously defend and support my work, and to John Cole and the National Book Festival for their support as well."
quote: "My stories are based on things that have happened to me in real life. Living through the losses and heartbreak associated with difficult and challenging moments is way harder than later using the material of those experiences to try and create understanding and compassion in readers. Usually by the time I'm writing a novel about something painful and hard, I've gained enough distance and perspective to approach the material with honesty and, hopefully, a certain level of fearlessness. You can't write realistic fiction if you're a chicken-butt. You have to take risks."
quote: "1. I get a hot bath every day of my life and never have to lift a finger. The warm water gets squeezed over my body from the big sponge in my mom's gentle, loving hands. And this bath is by far the most enjoyable physical sensation I ever feel."
quote: "3. Although I can't tell anybody what kind of music I'd like to listen to, I love almost all the music that's played around here (rap/hip-hop, R&B, Bach and Mozart, geezer R&R) so whatever's on pretty much always makes me happy."
quote: "4. My brother, Paul, King Jock, Straight-A Student, Tough Guy Supreme, slips me bites of his deluxe bacon double cheeseburgers every chance he gets. Somehow Paul knows that I, too, think God invented this food to make up for the fact that all of us have to die someday."
quote: "6. Although Mom has a master's degree in English and could be a college teacher or have some other higher-paying job, she works from home so she can take care of me. If Cindy is a saint, think about what that makes my mom."
quote: "7. I'll never have to get a lousy part-time job like carrying people's groceries to their cars in a supermarket parking lot or cleaning out toilets and mopping floors in some crummy restaurant."
quote: "9.... so I'll never have anybody bossing me around—I know this is partly a bad thing as I'll never get to boss anybody else either, but I don't think I'd like doing that anyway."
quote: "10. I have a kickass name. Shawn McDaniel is really cool sounding when compared to a name like Elmer Ulysses Fudpucker or Isaac P. Freeley."
quote: "12. I am in love with Ally Williamson, the girl of my dreams, and while I'd love to find some way to make her fall in love with me too, at least I get to imagine that she's mine all mine."
quote: "Ah, what the heck, just for good luck let's make it 13. I didn't even mention my dream life yet. Did I say dream life? Hey, Ally, here I come!"
quote: "7 days at the hot corner / by Terry Trueman.— 1st ed."
quote: "1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10"
book path: 7 Deadly Women - Jamie I. Hall.epub.txt
beginWordsDict: {"preface":[55]}
readFrom: 55
quote: "The pursuit of love makes many want to jump out of them.\""
quote: "I STARTED WRITING WHEN I WAS YOUNGER and it always had a place in my work. Just before actually sitting down and writing this book, a co-worker described my reports as \"whimsical\". He suggested I should write a book given my active imagination and vivid descriptions of even the most mundane subjects."
quote: "When I decided to write 7 Deadly Women it was intended to be a project for myself. Four days in and I was half done. I decided to let my girlfriend at the time read what I had written and she loved it—or so she said, she lied a lot."
quote: "The main character is a very flawed man as many of us are, but in no way reflects my personal views on women or dating. If you need to tie the story to me personally then just imagine your frustration after a bad relationship or dating experience. Now imagine that frustration writing a book."
quote: "It is my hope that you are entertained by the circumstances in the life of Jason Mytez and that you never discover which women and circumstances were lent from real life."
quote: "Remember, just because the world is obsessed with \"reality\" doesn't mean fantasy doesn't have it's place."
quote: "I'M JUST A GUY NAMED JASON and you're about to experience my life story in a flash."
quote: "There is nothing particularly remarkable about me on the surface but I take the time to enhance an otherwise ordinary package. You will rarely find me with facial hair, as I like the \"so fresh and so clean\" look. I use creams on my face to prevent the effects of aging—you know crow's feet and that little line that forms between the eyebrows. My hair is short and I am religious about my monthly trim as well as my trips to the gym 3-days a week. I'm not a huge juice monkey but I'm not a human Twinkie either."
quote: "I manscape from head to toe primarily because I think it looks better and because I find chest hair itchy. Manscaping below the belt line has always been a priority. I've been gifted with a slightly larger than average penis that is both wide and long with what I feel to be very kissable balls, so I want to keep things nice and clean for any big reveals."
quote: "Looks aren't everything though and keeping the mind sharp is important. I'm a sponge for information but I'm not a huge fan of commercialized news. I get my info from late night TV, fringe media and a cool little podcast called Stuff You Should Know, which is hosted by two guys that I identify with greatly—Josh and Chuck. This allows me to stay engaged in pretty much any conversation."
quote: "I've had a decent—if not in descript—title at any given time, an above average income that I can't seem to get under control and in fact, I've always been that guy with the fairly stable job and plenty of money coming in even if the money doesn't stick to my bank account. I appeared rich to everyone and perception is often reality."
quote: "All of this gets me dates with some pretty attractive women. Word gets round ya know?"
quote: "Growing up I wanted just two things–money and a sweet girl to take care of. I even knew what she was going to look like. Every time I pictured my dream girl walking through a door she was 5'4\", slim, blond, had plenty of curves and dimples. She would laugh at my jokes and go beet red at the suggestion of something experimental in the bedroom. She'd always want to hold my hand and above all else, would make the hair stand up on the back of my neck when we engage in a spirited lip lock."
quote: "My mom told me I was a sweet boy so I found it natural to want a sweet girl. It's also because of my mother that I grew up believing that which I saw in movies—the happy ending with the beautiful girl, the nice car and nothing but open road through the mountains. I believed in happy endings because it only made sense that life would imitate art eventually, right?"
quote: "I feel obliged to pass on my experience. Happy endings are for the movies especially when your internal woman radar keeps leading you to a corrupt true North full of women with issues. If a fucked up fine ass female walks into a restaurant my latency intuition goes to shit; whatever is happening in front of me fades to the background so I can search out the next knife in my back."
quote: "Don't get me wrong though. I like my ladies—girls with manners. I would say less than one percent of the girls out there are in fact ladies and of that small percentage, they date within a certain social circle or their dance card is filled before I even get to the ball. So, somewhere along the way I woke up and realized by shear statistical analysis, I must settle at some point, for we all settle eventually in this epic little life we lead."
quote: "Now I realize I am sounding negative which I do not mean to be. Despite the mathematical equation that marks me destined to end up in Tsunami style relationships with sluts and crazy bitches, I still have an idealistic side that holds out hope for an angel."
quote: "These are just three of the seven types of deadly women I have encountered—the slut, the crazy bitch, and the angel. By no means am I saying that these are the only types of women out there. I'm saying these, are the types of women I attract. Although, I think anyone would be hard pressed to find a girl that doesn't fit into each of these categories."
quote: "The first deadly woman is a girl whom we all know too well—the slut. She says things like \"I don't usually do this\" and works a dick like she's driving a Formula One racecar. Two months later, you and a buddy are awkwardly trying to determine a frantic timeline to see who got the sloppy seconds. The slut's weapon of choice is her skirt—just long enough so that you can't see what is underneath and just short enough to make you want a peek. If you can see what's under that skirt then she is a slut in training—move on. Her fake ID likely says that she's too young for you anyways."
quote: "Number two is the crazy bitch. This girl is great in the sack but has more emotional baggage than a fifteen-year old alter boy at the Vatican. One second she's the coolest chick walking sweet baby Jesus' daddy's earth and the next she's channeling Satan and speaking in tongues. Her weapon of choice is the ability to make you feel bad when she's in the wrong."
quote: "The good girl is on the endangered species list but still exists in the wild. They are out there. It's usually a girl who says \"I love you\" every time she gets off the phone with her parents and giggled her way through grade twelve sex-ed. She's hard to relate to sexually but easy to get along with from the first time you talk. As bad as a guy like me might want to see what's behind the cloak of Gap gear, my brand of man can't seem to find the moral loop hole which would allow me to jump her bones. I wouldn't want to get my stench of various cheap perfumes and scented body washes on her. She doesn't have a weapon because she has yet to figure out that she needs one."
quote: "The lady of change is next on my list. She's a nice girl. She probably has a bodacious bod that Brooke Burke would kill to possess and a personality that could match wits with Bill Gates. She may even come from money as an added bonus. The problem is not that she's a lady, it's that her mission is change. She is always latching onto bad boys and even though it happened before and it will happen again—she's surprised that, a bad boy turns into a bad guy. You'll often hear this girl say \"but he was so nice to me\" as all hell breaks loose. Her weapon of choice? Denial—for without it she could never get through the day."
quote: "The Virgin does exist, sorta. While traditional virgins are mythical creatures that died in Grade ten—like unicorns—they exist instead in the twenty-first-century as girls who haven't gone through their stage yet. I define the stage as that point in time where a girl wants the penis more than she wants the security. It is a part of dating evolution. First, there is discovery, then the illusion of love, then the stage, security, and finally marriage. At what point in their lives women go through this evolutionary process and the number of times they repeat the pattern is entirely dependent upon the type of guys they meet along the way. Since the virgin hasn't gone through the stage, she's probably dating her high school sweetheart or has some equally adorable story. The guy that she's with had better treat her like gold though, because there's an apple truck waiting outside the door. The virgin's weapon of choice is the break-up."
quote: "Harder to explain because this woman comes in many forms, may I present the experienced twenty-first-century woman. This female has fucked and sucked her way to settling down with a nice guy and a nice career. She is a breath of fresh air for she has gone through her stage and isn't afraid to admit it. This is unlike many women out there who hide their past fornications from the world. At some point she traded in the mini-skirt for a nice blazer, pant combo. She's confident and has goals because she's seen it all. Miss twenty-first-century's weapon of choice is her attitude."
quote: "Then there is the seventh deadly woman with the ultimate weapon—the angel. This is usually an ex and no matter how fucked up she gets—you can only see her in that perfect moment you once had. To you, she is your savior. She's the one person on this speck of dirt and water that can make your pathetic little existence seem worth it. Oh, she's a goddess and evil at the same time. Loving her is a gift from Heaven. Trying to get her out of your head—if you lose her—is a curse from hell. You'll always be a sucker for the angel because her weapon of choice is—drum roll please—you."
quote: "These are the women I have encountered over the years. They continue to chip away at every morsel of my being. There have been no exceptions to the rule. The problem is women are like drugs. Meet one that starts the dopamine flowing through your body and you're fucked harder than an inmate in maximum-security prison."
quote: "Meet me along the way and you have a guy that goes all in. I'm emotionally invested and want to please the woman I'm with even if it means sacrificing myself in the process. This was likely the biggest part of my problems in the dating world. I was a guy on the road to success, and then I let women successfully take me over. The tightly shaped vagina became more important than the mighty made dollar. The balance between my two goals began to shift."
quote: "This is my tale of dating in the twenty-first-century, which, for most men is a cruel joke because no matter what we do, we're always behind the eight ball."
quote: "We're Neo in the Matrix. We need to get somewhere but Mrs. Smith is guarding all of the doors, holds all of the keys—and the keys are in her vagina."
quote: "THE FIRST GIRL I SLEPT WITH got a bit more than a cum shot but before I get to that story of blood and pain, I think it needs to be said that I was what some might call a late bloomer. Much to my dismay, in hindsight, while most boys my age were discovering the art of the hand job and feeling up girls I was entrenched in the amazing adventures of Peter Parker and his alter ego—Spiderman."
quote: "I remember the first night I popped the floodgates to a world of sexual discovery. I was in my parent's basement wearing superhero pajamas and I woke up sweating. No one had any kind of a talk with me—thanks dad—and when I went to wipe myself off, I remember being confused and thinking that I should wake my parents to take me to the hospital."
quote: "God Bless dad's stash of Playboy under the sink—redemption for the man who explained nothing to me; I saw Miss March and my Sergeant was standing at attention once again. I soon realized what was going on and how much I liked it. All of those books with naked people in different positions made sense now. Hell, even the ignorant shit that people wrote on bathroom stalls finally had meaning."
quote: "After that wondrous night of discovery, you would often see me on my bike after school, trying to beat my parent's arrival home. Once inside I'd b-line it for the basement and about two-minutes later I was letting out a victory roar. I couldn't get enough and I knew the next step was a girl."
quote: "Unfortunately, like all late bloomers, I had zero game and less guts. Martha Stewart had more testicular fortitude than this hombre. However, despite my lack of suave, about a year later I landed a kiss. It lasted for about forty-five minutes at a party in a friend's basement. Now that I look back, what the fuck are two people doing kissing for forty-five minutes? How was I even able to sustain excitement for that long?"
quote: "It wasn't sweet and passionate or rough and exhilarating. It just was what it was, which I can say was very different from my previous experiences kissing Jenny Love posters and pillows. Neither of us seemed to be able to control our saliva, which made for a sloppy but nonetheless, satisfying experience. At one point, I was using my tongue to feel around inside of her mouth as if I was on an exploratory mission for NASA."
quote: "That girl—her name; Heather—was my first encounter with lucky number one—the slut. Now that I look back I have no idea how I could have been so clueless. I was walking through the hallways, head raised along with other body parts, thinking I was the man. Turns out I was at the tail end of a sexual pendulum. While I was kissing Heather, Matthew Gill was fucking her. I probably should have seen the signs. At one point Heather asked why I never played with her breasts or let her see my cock. Kids say the darndest things."
quote: "I remember the feeling of confusion when I found out that she was engaged in a game of sexual twister minus me—why had this happened? What did I do wrong? I was crushed and had become a walking, talking, kissing joke because of course as with everyone's first crush I mistook what I was feeling for love. Really, it was just out of control hormones raging for a fix."
quote: "If Internet porn had been around back then—as available as it is today—I probably wouldn't be so fucked up. There might not have even been a Heather experience. There's no emotional confusion or long-term effects from the world of squirting, fisting and MILFs besides carpal tunnel I'm sure. Long-live Internet porn!"
quote: "Now, I'm going to fast-forward a bit, because we all know taking any relationship seriously before you turn eighteen is social retardation. I just wanted you to know where it all started. Unfortunately, I did go through my fair share of sluts—dating, not sex. I was scared as shit of the intercourse."
quote: "Each time I dated one of these little divas in training I was just as confused about the result of our \"relationship\". Anyone that tells you sluttiness in school age girls is something new is lying to you. That's right your mom and your grandma are probably liars. There are girls out there that turn thirteen and are looking for their first thirteen-inch cock—they've been around forever."
quote: "Possibly the hardest thing for anyone to accept is that the person they are with has a past. It could even include being that thirteen year old or just your run of the mill slutty club girl. Life would be fantastic if we could all get unicorn virgins and that be enough, but that's not the way things work. The guy or girl you're with right now has a past and it made them who they are today. So as hard as it is to accept that they were doing the pelvic Dougie with someone else at some point—get over it or you'll die alone."
quote: "Heather and the other brutal excuses for girls that I \"dated\" in high school—through sheer disgust—ended up leading me to Vanessa. I found her through a friend. I had told everyone I was looking for a nice girl who didn't have a history of cheating. She was a cute red head from a good family with good morals and just plain good. She was the good girl before I knew I was the guy that shouldn't touch her."
quote: "She sang and danced, worked at Dairy Queen and had breasts that would make any feminist beg for a lower cut shirt. In short—she was hot. All I wanted to do was quit the dry humping and part the pink sea however she was also a romantic so certain steps had to be taken. A couple of years had passed since my first experiences in dating and I was now over my fear of sex."
quote: "We weren't really a couple or dating. We just knew we were attracted to each other and that is enough when two people are carrying around extremely heavy v-cards."
quote: "The first two times we had sex we didn't really have sex. The pieces didn't fit together so to speak and despite rented hotel rooms, candlelight and presents—we were left unsatisfied. That all changed with a midnight swim, however."
quote: "\"Do you think the water will make it easier?\" She asked with a bit of a nervous grin."
quote: "\"God I hope so,\" I replied. \"I'm starting to think I couldn't sharpen a pencil in there.\""
quote: "\"Really Jason?\" She splashes water in my face. \"I'm pretty sure you're supposed to be complimenting me or something to get me in the mood.\""
quote: "\"Well it put a smile on your face. You love my unique sense of humor. Without a face like Mister Pitt, it's all I've got!\""
quote: "Our eyes locked as we moved closer together, making little ripples in the water as we nonchalantly took off our bathing suits. The pool was in the backyard of her parent's place, guarded by tall pine trees. The moon was big, complimenting the romantic mood set by the pool lighting. She was still living with her parents during her quest to figure out if she wanted to be a doctor or a professional singer as it was rent free and gosh darn it, her parents believed she could make it in whatever she did. By the time we met, we were naked. I slammed her against the side of the pool, lifted up her legs, and worked hard. I was about to hit a home run when she realized what we were about to do."
quote: "\"In the water? Will that actually work?\" I was just stalling, hoping she wouldn't care and just let me keep going. I was centimeters from the Holiest of Holy lands."
quote: "We weren't sure about anything except the fact that we wanted to take a wild ride on the sexual side so at her behest we jumped out of the pool, I grabbed a condom and she laid on the chaise poolside."
quote: "I strapped on the awkwardly small piece of latex, pulled her body close to me as I got on my knees at the end of the chair and then her hands guided me right in. The added lubrication from the condom made the access much easier."
quote: "That first moment where you finally get in is like breaking into a house. You're not sure if anyone's around and you feel like you probably shouldn't be doing it but the rush is so intoxicating, that you must keep going."
quote: "She let out a little squeal with every thrust, which made me nervous. \"Are you in pain?\" I asked awkwardly while trying to catch my breath and, to be honest, trying to hold back the urge to cum immediately."
quote: "\"Seventeen had an article about this. It always hurts the first time.\" Banter during sex. How do you like them apples?"
quote: "My mind was racing and my heart was beating fast. I didn't know what to do with my hands so I just grabbed at her perfect breasts like I was tuning an old school radio. My legs kept slipping on the wet surface so it was hard to really get in there. As awkward as it was I still enjoyed it and I really couldn't envision any circumstance in which a guy wouldn't like this whole sex thing."
quote: "About five minutes went by when it happened. The feeling of utter joy and manhood power turned red. I had heard girls did bleed a bit during their first time but there was just too much flowing down there for that piece of sexual trivia hidden deep in my mind to make sense."
quote: "\"Are you on your period?\" I asked awkwardly, hoping it was she, and not I."
quote: "I pointed out the obvious, which made her shriek. The sight of blood had her running for the washroom but there was no need. I realized quickly that the blood was coming from inside of the condom."
quote: "\"Yep, pretty sure. We can keep going though right?\" Fuck guys are dumb when hormones are involved. The look on her face was all the answer I needed. I finally had sex but there would be no victory roar tonight."
quote: "I was as puzzled as my little deflowered belle, so I decided to take the condom off. I quickly realized my skin was coming with it. My penis was literally falling apart. Shocked, I took a couple of steps backward and tripped over the diving board straight into the pool."
quote: "When I got my head above water I saw the condom and a long layer of skin floating at the surface. There was also the faint color of red floating around me."
quote: "Vanessa stood there horrified. \"Oh my God. I think I'm going to be sick.\" And so, she was...on me. You'd think that being puked on would have grossed me out but my penis was falling apart and I was swimming in my own blood. Vomit just didn't seem that bad at the moment."
quote: "I leapt up, threw on my clothes, and exited her parent's home—destination—hospital. Vanessa had no interest in accompanying me."
quote: "My doctor was a tall man with a British accent who didn't seem to love his job all that much. He didn't crack a smile or laugh at my joking probes about whether any guys got chubbies while he examined them."
quote: "My tests came back about 4 hours after the very painful exam. \"Well Mr. Mytez I have some good and some bad news.\""
quote: "\"Your symptoms are the result of an allergy to latex. That's the good news. It's nothing serious and within four, maybe six weeks you'll be all healed up. The bad news is you have an allergy to latex and given your proportions, finding condoms for any future poolside activities will be very difficult. Plus they're very expensive in comparison to regular latex types.\""
quote: "You have to understand. I was eighteen when I heard this news—late bloomer remember? My world was crushed into little tiny pieces. Just six hours earlier, I was on my way to a summer full of sex with a hot girl. Now there was this doctor who was telling me that just the act of trying to get laid would be difficult. Oh, and it didn't help that he couldn't contain his snicker. The man now seemed to really enjoy his job—asshole."
quote: "So, that's how my first time happened. Anyone that has a horror story about their first can forever rest easy because unless a dog bit off a guy's balls or a girl's vagina locked up, I have the worst first time story in history. It took me almost a month for my penis to heal. My ego—well that took a bit longer. A real man sulks."
quote: "AFTER THE GREAT LATEX DISASTER, I didn't care to do very much and in fact, I was deeply depressed. It might be because I worked all of those years towards a goal—getting laid and being really good at it—then...that. A psychologist might say that I'm not very good at dealing with negative issues while recommending some sort of breathing and visualization exercises, then, maybe some yoga."
quote: "I decided to take my own route to healing. Amongst other great decisions at the time, I didn't return any phone calls from my boss. That led to a notice in my email releasing me of my duties. That didn't matter much because I didn't really want to get out of bed."
quote: "The night it all happened, Vanessa had to call a friend over to help her clean out the pool before her parents got home. While cleaning she told that friend the entire story and even though I'm sure it was not her idea, said friend then went and posted the story on the net, complete with photos. After the news hit the Internet, I was looking for a gun. Good thing I had never thought to buy one previously. For the next two weeks after the incident, I was simply embarrassed."
quote: "Depression is no child's play. I kept my room dark, listened to the angriest of metal and in between checking how the healing was going—I pictured Vanessa being hit by a bus. The darkness was almost overwhelming at times. I didn't want to show my face in public but life must go on at some point when you are without weapons of suicidal intentions."
quote: "When I finally decided to roll out of bed I sent out some resumes. It took almost no time to find an assistant-management job at a new nightclub with two real slime balls named Carl and Sean. Previously, they were the first guys I worked for when I started working the clubs at the tender age of sixteen. Trust me when I say this—lying about your age is one of the least morally reprehensible and illegal things that is done in the name of the club business."
quote: "Almost three years later, I had made a name for myself and was on track to being the youngest guy to do pretty much everything. I was once again working with Carl and Sean, who added me to the team at Opium and my job was to immediately staff the club."
quote: "That's when I met the good girl that would truly define what a good girl is—Kim. She was interviewing to become a hostess, which works cover charge and coat check. She had next to no makeup on, her deep brown hair up in a ponytail and was as cute as a care bear—not your typical nightclub interview. In fact, I wasn't even going to hire her but another manager saw something in her. He said Kim was different from the other sexually charged hires, which I agreed with."
quote: "Kim \"dated\" one of Opium's bad boy bartenders whom one can only assume was just out for a piece of ass. That fell apart and became very messy. He was a mess because he didn't get anywhere close to reading Kim's vagina monologues—his ego was bruised—and she was down because she knew that, in the end, he was just trying to use her. This was Kim's first dose of harsh dating reality."
quote: "Since I was in a stage of mess myself I noticed how hurt Kim seemed, so one night at work I had her accompany me on a journey to the Dollar Store to buy some champagne glasses. I felt if we talked maybe, I could help her, and maybe she could help me. I was also rather intrigued by this girl who did not belong in the biz."
quote: "\"Does everyone think I'm this good girl?\" That's how she started the conversation in her car on the way to the store."
quote: "\"Well yeah, and in comparison to every other girl in this industry, you are.\""
quote: "\"I'm not as cute and innocent as everyone thinks.\" Her protest was weak at best because—yes—yes she was."
quote: "\"Why is that a bad thing? Why is being the good girl, a bad girl to be? I personally find it somewhat refreshing. You're the one good girl in a sea of sluts and psychopaths.\""
quote: "I could see this little ditty of truth made her smile a bit. \"I'd prefer to just have no reputation at all.\""
quote: "\"Wouldn't we all. But, in this snowy little city of ours, gossip and reputations are as good as currency. There are so many people with no lives so they fill in the boring days with experiences that others have. Just the lack of makeup and the clothes that cover up any inch of sexuality are enough for the rumor mill to hate on you.\""
quote: "\"I guess, but that doesn't mean I have to like it—not that I'll do anything about it.\""
quote: "\"The day you start doing something about it is the day you're no longer the good girl in everyone's eyes. Unfortunately the trade off is probably crazy bitch.\""
quote: "\"I guess being the good girl isn't so bad then. I really wouldn't want to be known for being insane.\" A few moments passed in silence before she popped the question. \"So did that latex thing really happen?\""
quote: "\"Man, that shit is going to follow me until the day I die isn't it?\""
quote: "She's unable to contain her laughter but that vulnerability seemed to help her warm up to me a bit. \"No probably not. Aw. I feel so bad for you. That wasn't exactly your fault.\""
quote: "I guess, that's one of those things that make her good. While people were busy running around adding more to the latex story she sympathized with me. \"I wish everyone saw it that way,\" I said with a smile."
quote: "It was the start to an amazing relationship, which became stronger with the coming weeks. We hung out, watched my favorite TV show; 24 and instead of going to a restaurant after the club closed each night, you could often find us cooking KD at my place."
quote: "I'm not going to lie. I wanted this good girl bad. Not only was she a lady, she looked to have more curves than the Himalayan mountains under those sweaters and jeans. We even talked about cuddling and kissing a couple of times like we were in junior high but for some reason every time we were alone we just didn't do it."
quote: "I was still scarred from my previous sexual disaster, still quite depressed—although she helped with that. I was also a bar manager, meaning my life was hectic and I had sluts trying to get with me on a nightly basis. I didn't want to drag this good girl into the mess that I called a life but at the same time—I did. I felt extremely conflicted."
quote: "Once the snow started to fall Kim decided to go visit some family in Texas. She was gone for a couple of months and in that time, I continued to sink deeper into the nightclub lifestyle. I was drinking more frequently and for the first time in my life I felt like a king—even if it was mostly an illusion. Opium was one of the city's top nightclubs and I was constantly receiving offers from the competition to come over to their camps."
quote: "Where my talents truly shined was in getting the staff behind the concept of the club and using technology to save Opium from unnecessary expenses. If I wasn't ordering the liquor or meeting with people from all walks of life, I was on the computer promoting or building systems. My job was round the clock and there were no real days off."
quote: "My attraction for the good girl faded while she was gone. It was a classic case of \"out of sight, out of mind\". She arrived back in Winnipeg just in time to work New Years Eve and informed everyone that she had gone and gotten herself a real life cowboy. I couldn't let her see I was disappointed—I also couldn't figure out why I was—so I just buried my head in the vajayjay as a distraction."
quote: "I was armed with large, non-latex condoms and ready for a crazy night. As a side note, the doc was right; large, non-latex condoms are very expensive so every encounter had to count. I had my eye on two hotties that were showing me some solid attention."
quote: "Throughout the night, I played off the two girls that I had eyed for my late night sexual tirade. I was smart—I kept them separate. Girl number one was named Hina and girl number two was named Janice. Hina was a hot little Asian girl with an ass that would make black girls jealous. Janice had long blond hair, big breasts, and great lips—a Barbie. One I only spoke to upstairs, and the other, downstairs. With attention from both, there was no way I would start the New Year alone in my bed. I had them perfectly separated until all three of us ended up in the basement of the club."
quote: "Staring at these two girls with only a door to the staff bathroom behind me, I froze. One little bead of sweat left my hairline and trickled down my face. \"So it turns out you've been a bad boy Mr. Mytez,\" said Hina. Busted!"
quote: "Now I could have ran, locked myself in the bathroom or been a submissive little skeeze and taken a beating from these two, but for the first time, confident Jason showed up and knocked this awkward moment in time out of the park. The way Hina said the words \"bad boy\" hinted a bit of sexual curiosity. Suddenly it hit me. I figured out what was happening here. I was on the cusp of a threesome and with the price of non-latex condoms, getting a two-for-one deal sounded good to me."
quote: "\"Bad in a good way though. I couldn't decide so I was trying to figure out a way to get the three of us together.\" We all had some alcohol in our systems—them more than me, thanks to a generous manager's tab—and I knew the thought of a threesome wouldn't be so objectionable at the moment. This was never my plan but I had to think fast on my feet—improvise, play the hand I was dealt; two queens."
quote: "\"Oh you're bad,\" and with that I knew Janice had given me the opening I needed. I just smiled and gave them their opening—the staff bathroom door. They followed me in and so went my first successful sexual experience. I just wish I had noticed Kim standing nearby the entire time."
quote: "No relationship so no chance of cheating, no blood, no chance of ending up on the Internet—and while the hard walls, hard floors and unforgiving sink made things a bit awkward at times—who gives a shit? I fucked like a porn star and made them scream like rock stars. Janice didn't even seem to mind when her head kept smacking into the paper towel dispenser. It was plastic—no harm, no foul. 15-minutes later it was all over."
quote: "Lying on the cold concrete bathroom floor with these 2 satisfied customers getting dressed to return to the party, I couldn't help but feel good. Hina even stopped to give me a final blowjob before exiting the washroom. She bent down over me, brought her face close to my ear and whispered, \"I'm going to go kiss my ex now.\" I burst out laughing uncontrollably."
quote: "The club could have been burning down around me and I wouldn't have cared. I finally got laid the right way—even if it was with two sexually liberal women. Okay, okay—sluts."
quote: "I collected my clothes, got dressed, did my hair, and then exited the washroom. When I got to the main floor of the club sure enough, Hina was kissing her ex, which left me amused but disgusted at the same time. Mental note—if an ex ever starts trying to get up on me at a club, run far away as fast as I can."
quote: "My attention to that situation was short lived however when I saw Kim. Body language told me any chance I had with her was now gone for good and the look on her face killed any high I was riding. The good girl busted me in the act of being a horny slut boy. In fact, it was likely that look, which kept me from pursuing any more slutty interludes for a bit. I just hate disappointing people in such a blatant and egregious way."
quote: "I tried to explain but she had no interest in hearing the words that were going to be articulated and if you stop and think—what the fuck would I have said? I was caught red handed. The 24 sessions, the cool hangouts, late night KD dinners—none of it mattered. Was it slightly hypocritical of Kim to be mad at me for getting down when she had a boyfriend? Yes, but again, that's what makes her the good girl. She doesn't know the rules and hasn't even recognized that it's all a game."
quote: "I was going to chase after her but a fight broke out and only one bouncer was close. I had no choice but to jump in and let her go."
quote: "After a threesome in a bathroom—guess who started the New Year alone in his bed after all? Sex without emotion is good in the moment but it sure as shit is lonely later."
quote: "The next day I came into work to find Kim's resignation slipped under the door of my office. Her note was simple and to the point, \"I'm not mad. I'm just embarrassed and you don't seem to be the same guy that I knew before I went to Texas. I guess I'm not the same girl either. Sorry, but I have to quit.\" Another thing that makes her the good girl—running from confrontation instead of sticking around to pull some hair roots out."
quote: "Way to go Jason—way to ruin a good thing. All I could think was hopefully I didn't ruin the good girl."
quote: "MS LILLIAN STRAUSS WAS MY FIRST SERIOUS GIRLFRIEND. After dealing with Kim and letting the clubs get the best of me with sex in washrooms and endless benders, my friends decided I needed to get out there and find a sexy girlfriend—not just a fling."
quote: "Lillian was gorgeous. Long dark hair, tight little body, exotic. She had the kind of legs that turned any breast-man into a loser for legs, and just the right amount of cuteness so that her sexuality wasn't intimidating. We spent six great months together. Actually, to correct myself—we spent six months together with a light salting of great days."
quote: "It wasn't long before I realized she was coo-coo for Cocoa Puffs. Some—including me—might have even called her a crazy bitch. At first, all was well. We were like PB&J—a great combo. Then Ms. Hyde decided not to hide any longer."
quote: "I was at another local nightclub after hearing rumors that a talent agent named Greg—who takes care of celebrity hosts out of New York—was partying during a flight layover. We were having a great conversation when Lillian came behind me, grabbed my hood, and proceeded to strangle me, as she tried unsuccessfully to lift me off my feet. I thought some random bar star was looking for a fight until I caught her face out of the corner of my eye."
quote: "She shot back with what she felt was justification for my public hanging, \"You told me you were going to see your mom.\""
quote: "Standing between Lillian and this guy from New York, I searched my mind for ways to salvage this situation. I can't get further in any career if I can't build relationships with people in larger cities. Winnipeg has geographical limitations and although Opium was successful—it could only last so long. Now here was Lillian, ruining my chances at building a potential relationship with a valuable contact."
quote: "I choked out the truth, which she would not believe. \"I was going to but then I found out Greg was in town and I thought it was a perfect opportunity to get to know someone from New York.\""
quote: "With that, knowing hell hath no fury like a woman who enjoys abusing her boyfriend—Greg bowed out to the other side of the club. Rubbing my neck, I realized there would be some bruising. I could feel my glands swelling to the size of golf balls."
quote: "\"And you're not listening,\" I snapped back. It's funny how even though we as men know that there is no way to win these battles we keep going. \"And besides I don't have to tell you every step I take.\""
quote: "From that moment on, I might as well have given her herpes and knocked up her mother because crazy bitches have a really nasty habit of making the most innocent of miscommunications seem like you just did a Mexican hat dance on their hearts."
quote: "\"I'm sitting at home waiting for you...cook you a nice dinner, knowing how stressed and over worked you are, then I get a text from a friend that you're at a club.\" She finished that little rant with a single tear and the stomp of her left foot."
quote: "What do you say to that? Anything that a guy comes up with surely sounds like an excuse or cheap justification so I said what every guy says, \"I'm sorry\". I mean c'mon, she was slaving in a kitchen while I was at a club—even if it was for work."
quote: "My neck sore, my ego bruised, and my tail between my legs; I returned home to see there was no meal being made. The pots and pans were tucked away in the cupboard, under the six-pounds of dust that was caked on from chronic lack of use, and there were no signs of any half prepared ingredients. The evil Slovakian Sorceress had duped me, locked me in with a guilt trip and then had the nerve to deny me some of that sweet lovin' I had become accustomed to each night. Much name-calling and many slammed doors later, the distance in our bed might as well have been an ocean between countries with no boat in sight. We went to sleep angry, which is never a good sign. In hindsight, moving in together so quickly was a bad idea."
quote: "That was our first big fight—the first of many. We usually fought over my job. I have to work long hours and I'm in the clubs constantly. My weekends were usually dedicated to my job which I thought would be a plus for any girl, as it gave her more of a chance to have nights out with the girls."
quote: "She didn't mind my job when she met me in the club, when she didn't have to wait in line or when we would sneak off to VIP sections so she could ride me all the way to the land of forbidden public orgasms. She only minded my job when it suited her to do so."
quote: "Everyone thought we were a horrible couple but what did they know? They weren't around in those moments when emotion was all that mattered. We loved old movies, the same kind of hip hop—not that shitty hip pop music but Talib Kweli and Mos Def, we shared in the same tastes for food and we even loved the same kind of shitty vodka—raspberry flavored UV."
quote: "We would sit up all night playing Mario Kart, pigging out on the marshmallows from Lucky Charms and often ended our late nights dancing to some Boyz II Men in our living room. These were the great moments."
quote: "It's just too bad there couldn't have been more of them. I'm a bit hot headed but this chick had me over a barrel, as my grandfather would have said. We argued a lot and our arguments always seemed to start with me offering the same rebuttal. \"You knew what I did when you met me. You knew I have to live my job in order to actually do it well.\""
quote: "I say this knowing full well, that Home Depot is not the best place to have an argument and that this sentence, which I have become all too familiar with, is a weak argument in her mind."
quote: "\"You just don't seem to care. You're always talking about work.\""
quote: "Now when women say always they mean occasionally. It's an exaggeration they think helps them win an argument but it just gets a guy fired up."
quote: "\"I don't think sharing my day, good or bad with you every so often is always and if it were, it's my job, you're my girlfriend, we share our days.\""
quote: "\"You don't hear me talking about my work all of the time.\""
quote: "\"Yes hunny but that's because you sit at a desk and do paper work. Your job is boring.\""
quote: "Fuck. Of all the stupid shit I could have said. She stares at me with icy eyes, contemplating the appropriate punishment for my ignorance. Three things you should never mock in someone's life—their home, their vehicle or their job. Each requires too much investment of time or money for them to take the joke well. Sometimes we just say stupid shit though."
quote: "I stood there waiting for some sort of reaction and the sentencing for my crimes. In life, the woman is always the judge, jury and, at times, the executioner. So what would it be? No sex, perhaps? This punishment had become quite common. Perhaps she would give me the silent treatment? Although, I think she learned a long time ago, that I actually kinda liked that punishment."
quote: "On this particular occasion, I'm guessing she couldn't think of anything so she decided to push the shopping cart over, smashing a $450 mirror in the process."
quote: "She didn't reply. She just walked away, or maybe her response was leaving me to pay for this broken mirror and the replacement one, which we needed for the house we were renting."
quote: "At this point, I know we're not right for each other but the sex; oh, man is the sex good. I seem to be able to have good sex with slim girls. It's easier to control the bedroom. Nevertheless, do I stick around just for good sex and the lottery moment when we actually like being with each other?"
quote: "Six months into this thing and I rarely wake up feeling like it will be a good day. Her beauty doesn't stun me as much anymore because she's always so crazy and angry. Those cute moments that made us fall for each other are now rare. That's right folks—the countdown had begun, I had the launch codes, I just needed to turn the key and it would all be over."
quote: "Upon arriving home from Home Depot after an extremely irritating car ride, the next argument starts. She doesn't bring in any of the eighteen bags. I carried everything and when I brought in the two mirrors, she just stood there staring with that stink eye she perfected just for me."
quote: "\"What?\" I snap at her. At this point, I feel hot. I know my face is red. The anger is about to boil over. My chin starts to itch. That's when I know something is coming, like when someone's palm itches and he or she feels money is about to come their way. If my chin is itchy then batten down the hatches, call in the National Guard—I'm about to blow."
quote: "\"That mirror is broken. Why are you bringing it in the house?\""
quote: "\"Well Lillian, maybe because I spent $450 on it after you decided to Hulk out and throw the cart across Home Depot. This mirror to me, represents about a week's work so every day I'm going to do my hair and you're going to do your make up in it as a reminder of how truly fucking stupid and childish you can be some times.\""
quote: "She's stunned. She's floored. She is...speechless. Thank God—silence. I make pace to our living room and look out the window because once again her face just doesn't look so good to me at the moment. Looking out at the swaying branches in the wind and the general peacefulness of nature can usually help calm me. I need to calm thine self before I do something stupid; a regular occurrence in my life. Thirty-seconds have gone by without a word and it is utter Heaven. This is what I needed—calm."
quote: "My days had become about getting up in a haze. Then I showered while half-conscious. After that, I missed breakfast because of some \"huge\" emergency that came out of no where, which led to, going to work for twelve hours, then coming home to an argument; which by the way was the only time I really felt awake. That was followed by great make up sex before falling asleep at five in the morning. Calm was welcomed."
quote: "I felt her coming up on me. I thought that maybe I had finally made my point. Maybe, just maybe, my girl finally realized how stupid these useless arguments were."
quote: "She's coming for a hug. I think back to our hugs of the past. They're so warm and nice. The first hug is always the best isn't it? When I really like someone, that first hug gives me warmth and tingles. I don't want to let that person go. I used to have that with Lillian—those were the days. Within seconds, I feel warmth but it's not nice. I look at my shoulder to find a piece of the $450 mirror stabbed into me with force."
quote: "There is no question that this will not be one of those back-and-forth relationships. Stabbing each other usually means a complete break-up with no going back."
quote: "Even though I'd been stabbed, I'd somehow—in this beyond dysfunctional moment—stayed calm. \"Holy fuck\" is all I could come up with. I didn't yell, I didn't scream. I just said it under my breath."
quote: "\"There. You love this mirror so much, it's yours.\""
quote: "I wasn't even sure what that meant but the pain was starting to set in. She took a shard of mirror and stuck me in the back, right in the meaty part of my shoulder. This mirror, which she broke and I paid for, was now covered in my blood and sticking out of my body."
quote: "\"We're done.\" It's all that I could think to say. \"We're just done. This can't be right.\""
quote: "\"Fine,\" she said as she stomped out the door. The crazy bitch stabs me and then leaves. Un—fucking—believable."
quote: "I paced the living room and contemplated what I should do. Should I go to the hospital? What if they ask what happened? Do I tell them? Will they arrest her? Wait, why do I care if she is arrested? She just stabbed me with my $450 mirror. Do I pull it out like so many action stars I see in movies or do I leave it in?"
quote: "I'd seen in some movies where they pull out the object and it gives them great relief, but I'd also seen movies where they say if you remove the object inside of you, the blood could start spewing uncontrollably. I tried to pull on it ever so slightly and dropped to my knees in pain. It's after this that I vote to leave the mirror in my back. Not because it's better for my health but simply because—fuck that."
quote: "I was rushing to get out the door and on the road. I just needed to find my shoes—hard when your vision is going blurry. Fuck. I can't find my shoes, I think to myself. I go outside, bare foot, only to find that the crazy bitch has taken the truck and so begins my fifteen-minute walk to the nearest hospital with mirror heating up inside of me from the hot sun—the burn is almost too much to take. By the time I arrived at the emergency room my feet were bloody from walking on the shitty roads of Winnipeg without shoes."
quote: "I get to the counter and a nurse acknowledges my presence without looking at me. \"Can I help you, sir?\""
quote: "It's the last thing I remember before I hit the ground hard—passed out like a pussy. Turns out you can't bleed for twenty-minutes and stay conscious. Who knew?"
quote: "Mirror, mirror on the wall, who is the craziest bitch of them all? Lillian Straus—my newly anointed ex-girlfriend who probably wore my shoes, as she drove away in my truck, leaving me to bleed to death. Fuck my life."
quote: "WHILE HEALING FROM BEING STABBED, I made a radical adjustment in my way of thinking. I decided not to sulk over the whole thing with Lillian and instead jump right back on the horse as \"they\" say."
quote: "With seventeen stitches holding my upper-back together, it was time to hit an annual family Thanksgiving dinner at my cousins, Natasha and Tom's house. I decided to keep the whole stabbing incident quiet and not tell anyone. This was going to be a nice moment to relax and get away from all of the craziness of dating and nightclubs."
quote: "Dinner at my cousin's can be a bit of a hit or miss, because there's always an eclectic group of people whom I can either feel comfortable enough to take the milk challenge with or whom make me uneasy and convert me back to my shy high school self. In fact, calling it a family dinner is a bit of a stretch but my mom always called these people our \"extended family\" so I decided to adopt that manner of thinking as well."
quote: "The food was fantastic. There were all of the classic Thanksgiving trimmings and as was tradition in our family, my cousins made a Turduckin—Turkey with duck and chicken in it, wrapped in bacon. Everyone needs to try this testament to first-world gluttony at least once."
quote: "I was feeling fairly uncomfortable at this particular dinner so I stayed on the back porch with only a few people for the first bit. After the food was finished and I felt like a fat kid, I was going to try leaving without being noticed but I was stopped by some of my cousin's friends to talk \"clubs\". After ten minutes, I decided to stay and that's when I spotted a girl across the room sitting in a big comfy brown chair."
quote: "She looked vaguely familiar. I'm not one for mulatto chicks but she was all kinds of sexy—tall, slender, great rack and right from the start I noticed her eyes while she was carrying on a conversation with someone else. They jumped from elation to judgment without notice. You could almost read an entire conversation by watching her eyes react. For some reason I found this incredibly sexy."
quote: "I tapped my mom on the shoulder. \"Mom, who is that?\" I subtly point to the girl in the chair."
quote: "\"Oh c'mon Jason. You don't remember Stephanie? Ray Neufeld's daughter.\""
quote: "\"That's Stephanie? Jesus. She's all grown up now.\""
quote: "\"Easy.\" My mom knew what I was thinking before I even got a chance to make a move. \"This is a family dinner and you know her and her parents are like family.\""
quote: "Ray Neufeld was a tall black guy that taught me a thing or two on the basketball court growing up. Her mom kicked Ray to the curb years earlier, and Stephanie decided she was more of a mommy's princess than a daddy's girl. There was a lot of history there. Stephanie and I had grown up in the same circles but she was three years younger. That meant, as kids I picked on her relentlessly."
quote: "I decided that I would now abandon that whole extended family mentality and consider Stephanie fair game like any other girl. The goal for the night was to strike up a conversation with this sexy chick with the disapproving eyes—probably in spite of my mom's protests."
quote: "\"Hey Stephanie. Remember me?\" This approach was simple, straight to the point. It seemed like a good opening line."
quote: "\"Of course. How are you?\" She said it in a way that let me know she was polite but at the same time, I could tell she was thinking about that time when she was five and I lit up a bow on her dress. The conversation continued cordially until we got to a conversation about club hoes."
quote: "\"I'm tired of these girls in their see through skirts with their blond hair, running around acting like superstars when their only talent is spreading their legs,\" she said without any pause. She clearly had no issue saying what was on her mind."
quote: "\"I agree. They're ridiculous. The other night I was closing up the club and found one of those skirts on the floor in the corner along with a bright orange thong.\""
quote: "The conversation was going great. Stephanie shared in my newfound dislike for sluts as well as wannabe gangstas. She was warming up to me. I could see it in her body language. Girls lean away when they're not interested. Stephanie was full on leaning into the conversation—a solid start I would say."
quote: "Naturally, since things were going so well life threw me a curve ball. Her kid came running up and did some sort of jumping lap splash thing."
quote: "\"Who's this?\" I asked, like I didn't already know the answer."
quote: "Perhaps it was that moment, which doomed me to failure. Maybe she saw the look in my eyes and the hesitation when she confirmed she had a daughter—for you see I'm not a kid guy. When I come into a room, infants scream like Barney just walked through the door with one eyeball hanging off. There has just never been a natural connection between kids and myself. Regardless, I kinda liked what I saw in Stephanie so, I figured why not try something new?"
quote: "Despite the whole child incident, I decided to invite her to the Young Associates Ball, which is a big deal event where people have to stay classy—at least classier than usual. It's one of those pat ourselves on the back kind of deals."
quote: "\"Sure. Let's do it.\" She replied with a smile."
quote: "I scooped up my things, gave my mom a kiss, punched my brother, said bye to my dad, thanked my cousins for a great dinner and got out of there as fast as I could. I did that because every time I am on top of a conversation I think of the Seinfeld episode when George \"went out on a high note\". I believe the point was to leave them wanting more and it worked. It took only twenty minutes for Stephanie to text me asking if I had left, which led to a long conversation about any and everything."
quote: "The Young Execs Ball wasn't for another couple of weeks so I had plenty of time for texts and the chance to get to know her a bit better. This is usually where I shined with a girl of substance. On the flip side, if I was dating a club girl—this is where I lost her. Intellectual conversation will do that."
quote: "We must have gone back and forth over 10,000 times. We sent texts at work, in bed, while we were out with others. We talked about intimate moments in our lives and I even spent some time with her daughter sans-screaming. Things—I felt—were progressing along nicely."
quote: "Then the night finally came. The ball was the perfect stage for a great first date. I was dressed in a high-end pin stripe suit. Stephanie was wearing a sexy form fitting gown and some sparkly jewelry. She looked nothing short of captivating. We jumped in a limo and headed to...Fuckland."
quote: "I found out quickly that I had gotten two things extremely wrong leading up to this moment. The first was that I had Stephanie pegged for a twenty-first-century woman. Survey says—not even close. The second assumption that seemed obvious but for some reason, not to her, was that, this was a date."
quote: "We were walking throughout the ball, talking to people we knew and having a good time when she dropped a bomb on me."
quote: "\"I slept with Eric,\" she said while searching my face for any indication of what I was thinking."
quote: "It took me a second to scan through how I got here but I gained my composure and hit her with the first questions that came to my mind. \"Eric Eric? Player Eric? Like of Eric and Claudia? That Eric?\" I was trying to make her understand right off the bat how stupid this move was while trying not to sound sad about the horrid turn of events."
quote: "\"That's the one. But I didn't know he had a girlfriend until after.\""
quote: "\"No. He's staying with his girl and it turned into a huge mess and now friends I have in common with her have to take sides. It sucks.\""
quote: "She goes on to tell me this big complicated story about how she knows he's a bad boy but that's what attracts her. I try to explain my bad boys make bad guys theory but it seems to fall on deaf ears. Her baby daddy cheated and dealt drugs. Her most recent ex was a fighter with a Harley and a bad attitude. Eric was a player through and through."
quote: "\"Why does such a beautiful and seemingly intelligent woman keep going after these guys?\" I ask her with a very serious tone."
quote: "She thinks for a moment and comes up with nothing. \"I don't know. I've always liked the bad boys. It's just who I am.\""
quote: "\"Well that seems reasonable. I mean after at least 3 of these idiots turning into complete jerks I can see why you don't quite understand what's up yet.\""
quote: "\"Yes I do. Look over the last couple of weeks we have spent almost every waking second talking and I thought this was turning into something. But I'm going to guess I'm too much of a good guy for you.\""
quote: "I can read her face like a two page book. I'm not going to like what I hear. \"Aw, you are so sweet, really, but you're right. You're not my type. We work better as friends.\""
quote: "\"Well really. Who brings home a guy to meet her daughter who she's not interested in?\""
quote: "I'm pacing at this point and getting quite loud. \"Well let's review shall we? I asked you to a ball—not a bar, a movie, to smoke weed or shoot hoops—a fucking ball. This is Cinderella shit! We have become quite close. I got a limo, flowers, we danced, we're taking pictures together—what part of that sounds like friends to you because to me that all sounds like a date and the lead up to that date.\""
quote: "\"Well if I knew I had to shoot somebody to get your attention then you wouldn't have even had the chance. In fact, maybe I can go find a knife in the kitchen and stab the DJ—what will that get me? A good night kiss?\""
quote: "A few moments of awkward silence go by before I decide it is best we call the limo driver and I take her home. Frustrated I call on some friends to meet at our favorite late night restaurant after the limo drops me at my car."
quote: "It's a perfect cast of the bitter and the sweet at life. Sitting at the greasy burger joint we have Dustin—common law with two kids. There's Kristian—married with two kids that aren't his but he loves them like his own. Penn has a young girlfriend and when I say young, I mean young. None of us are even convinced he's happy but he's got a girl nonetheless. We have my cousin Tom who recently gave up the life of a player to settle down with his girl and finally we have Michael—the friend best known for dating a girl he met online and may or may not have met in person up to this point."
quote: "I tell them all the story of Stephanie and of course, they have a lot to say."
quote: "\"She's hot man but clearly not acting her age so just let it go,\" leads Dustin, the more conventional thinker of the group. \"Girls these days are fucked in the head. That was clearly a date.\""
quote: "\"I agree brotha,\" says Penn. \"You're a good guy and she either can't see that or she wants to use that to her advantage.\""
quote: "\"I spent two solid weeks working on this though—just give up? That seems like a waste,\" I retort."
quote: "\"Two weeks?\" Tom chimes in with laughter. \"That's nothing. Remember all that time you put in with that little slut bag in high school? You worked hard on getting her for months and all you have to show for it are battle wounds. Two weeks is nothing.\""
quote: "Kristian throws out a Hail Mary. \"Yeah man. This girl may be nuts for dating the guys she does but I hate to say it—you're kinda nuts for dating the girls you do.\""
quote: "\"Ya you've got me there,\" I concede. \"I don't know why I go after these emotionally retarded girls.\""
quote: "\"I know why,\" Kristian, states with certainty. \"Because you're just as big of an emotional retard as they are.\" Kristian gets the laughs around the table for that one. There is far too much agreement for my liking. \"You try to fix these stupid girls when you should be looking for girls you don't need to fix at all.\""
quote: "\"You'd have to date girls that don't still attend recess to know what that's all about Penn.\""
quote: "\"Yeah. You giving relationship advice is kinda like watching gay midget butt porn—just wrong Penn, just fucking wrong.\" Dustin's descriptive nature just cost me a burger. No way am I eating with that kind of visual in my head."
quote: "\"You know I love Stephanie. She's like a sister to me. But, if it's this hard now, it'll be even harder later.\" I tend to listen to Tom—a man of experience and few words."
quote: "In an effort to save some face, I shoot back at the guys. \"Look, none of you should be offering me relationship advice. You and your girls are all just as fucked up as me and mine. It may be in different ways but your relationships are still worthy of a Jerry Springer appearance.\""
quote: "Michael finally jumps in. \"Yeah, but at least we have real relationships Jason.\" There is a collective sigh around the table, given Michael's current situation. \"What?\""
quote: "They swear a bit and throw some food at Michael and me in disagreement but at least the conversation is now dead. After a few moments of awkward silence, while everyone pondered their own relationships, my phone rings. I check the call display, which reveals Stephanie's name. I debate picking it up and eventually do but I can't let the guys know who's on the other end. \"Weird. My mom is calling me. I gotta take this, might be important.\" No one believes the lie."
quote: "I go to a separate section of the restaurant and put the phone to my ear to hear a sobbing Stephanie. \"What's wrong?\" I ask, probably sounding annoyed but not meaning to."
quote: "\"He came over and was half cooked, got mad when I wouldn't give him any play and he hit me.\""
quote: "Itchy chin syndrome immediately sets in. \"I'm coming over.\" I hang up the phone quickly so I don't have to hear her debate. Rushing out of the restaurant, I hear my friends trying to find out where I'm going. I don't stop."
quote: "It takes me less than 10 minutes to get to Stephanie's place where I find her yelling outside and Justin on her front driveway mocking her. My first thought is that I'm gonna knock this guy into the next Universe but as I approach him I see that he's quite a bit bigger than me—and by quite a bit I mean the guy probably has at least 50 pounds of muscle on me."
quote: "No matter, I have a fist and I know a thing or two about how to use it. I ball that shit up and move to strike. The guy doesn't even see me coming—a hard right to the side of the head has him reeling. I kick him into the short, lightly snow dusted bushes, and then examine what my next move should be."
quote: "\"Why? The guy hit you. He deserves it.\" I shout back."
quote: "Justin's up on his feet now and he's pissed. The size advantage takes over. I hold him back as long as I can but he gets his left arm free of my grasp and slams his fist into my rib cage. I drop and he continues with a few shots to the kidneys then a boot to the back of the head. I'm out like someone flipped a light switch."
quote: "When I come to, I'm sitting on a curb looking up at Kristian, Dustin, Penn and Tom. \"What the fuck is wrong with you?\" Tom asks. \"You're lucky we got here when we did.\""
quote: "After I was knocked the fuck out, apparently, Justin wasn't done. He was going to take some more rounds out of me when the guys arrived and dealt with him."
quote: "\"We knew you were lying and figured you'd be here. Look at what you get retard.\" Penn is on point with how I'm feeling, completely retarded. \"Good thing Tom knew where Stephanie lives or you'd be dust.\""
quote: "The guys all go silent and start walking away when they see Stephanie coming down the driveway. \"Are you okay?\" she asks with some guilt behind it."
quote: "\"I'll live.\" I stand up, which requires a lot more effort than usual. My ribs and kidneys are sore and my head feels like it weighs 300 pounds. I let out a huge grunt as I get to my feet."
quote: "We stand looking at each other for a moment before Stephanie speaks. \"Why did you do that? You shouldn't have done that.\""
quote: "\"Yeah, but I love him and not you. There's a lot of water under that bridge and I know he'll change for Erin eventually.\""
quote: "\"Water?\" I point to her lip. \"Looks more like blood flowing under this bridge.\" I should have probably stopped there but I have a bit of a big mouth at times. \"So you'll sleep with Eric and call on Justin to cheer you up but the guy that comes to save you gets a fuck off and some bruised ribs for his effort. Those are some nice priorities you've got there, woman. Your daughter has a wonderful role model.\""
quote: "\"No you're right. I'm sorry. You respond better to being slapped around.\""
quote: "\"You asshole. Don't call me and I won't call you ever again.\" Damn it, she steals my line. I was really hoping to deliver that one."
quote: "As she walked back up to her house, I thought about my life lesson here. If the next girl has bad boy syndrome—run in the opposite direction. The lesson is only further re-enforced when I saw her and Justin hugging in the living room through the blinds."
quote: "When you're the good guy and she's a proponent of change in the impossible, all you get left with are bruised kidneys and a $650 bill for a night out that ends in disaster. Oh right, and you get to sleep alone. God damn it, I'm lonely."
quote: "IT'S COLD OUTSIDE as it is for about eight months out of the year in Winnipeg. I had cabin fever after being stuck in my house for a few days because of a wicked snowstorm. I had also decided that the world around me was spinning too fast so I escaped to a place where no one would think to look. My ego, my body, and my mind—all bruised and horribly battered."
quote: "My phone, which never stops ringing, was at home and life could wait. The DVD deck in my truck served me well in this abandoned parking lot residing in the last industrial park in the city. I performed my usual ritual—hit 7-11 for some snacks and a couple of drinks then picked up some movies from Wal-Mart. I had made my own private movie theatre. I come to this place about two or three times every year. It's the furthest point away from everything without actually leaving."
quote: "I liked these moments of solitude. It gave me a chance to think about what it was that I wanted to do with myself. I've always just pursued this natural progression in my life professionally but I knew deep down inside I wanted to be more than a nightclub manager. Some days I could tell myself I'm contributing positively to the world because when in clubs people meet, they fall in love, forge friendships, bonds—they escape their daily grind if only for a few hours. We set the stage for the night of their lives. However, that's all just justification for the fights, rapes, drugs, and car accidents that happen because of that one great night."
quote: "I come here to search my head for answers. Why do my relationships end so badly? I'm the only common thread so maybe it's me? Why do I keep making the same mistakes? I always wanted to be better than your average person—kinder, above it all, and now I'm just as average as the next guy."
quote: "I hated my job and I knew I hated it. There were no good days anymore, but it was the only thing I was good at. Before I went to stand in the unemployment line I had to be certain of my plans. No matter how big I get in the industry, I'm not going to change the world serving beer and booty. Personally and professionally—I just wasn't where I wanted to be."
quote: "I popped in a movie and started to half watch it while contemplating my next moves. Not even an hour in and I was dozing off. I just started to fall asleep when I heard a knock at my window. It scared the crap out of me, which isn't the best first impression when you meet a girl. I looked up and there stood this beautiful female—long brown hair, in a jacket with a furry hood. Her eyes were nothing if not spell binding. Her cheeks were adorable for some reason. I don't know what it was about them but her cheeks really made her face. After I did my appropriate examination, I noticed her shivering."
quote: "\"What are you doing out here?\" I ask as I open my door. The light snow, blowing in the wind, was making it feel like an ice storm."
quote: "\"Do you have a phone?\" she asks—clearly not wanting to answer my question."
quote: "\"I guess I could ask you the same thing.\" I could see my smart-ass approach to the situation wasn't turning her crank so I recovered by sounding like a homo. \"I come out here to think sometimes.\""
quote: "Uninterested, she started to walk away but I felt like I had to get to know her. We only said a few words and I was hooked or horny. It's really tough to say. I still hadn't figured out how to tell the difference. \"Wait.\" I jumped out of the truck in my t-shirt and jeans. \"Do you want a ride?\""
quote: "\"I don't usually make it a habit to get into the vehicle of strange guys in the middle of the night.\" Now she was doing the exam. I just hoped she liked what she saw."
quote: "\"Touché, strange woman. However, do you make it a habit to walk an hour in winter to get to a phone? Because that's how long it's going to take.\""
quote: "\"No way.\" I run in front of her. \"I'm not going to have your death in this crazy weather on my conscious. So, if you don't get in the truck I'm going to follow you to make sure you're okay. I'm not sure which is creepier but either way you're stuck with me.\" She pauses for a moment to think. I up the ante seeing a crack in her protective armor. \"I have hot chocolate.\""
quote: "There we go. She finally smiles. We get in my truck, she has a sip of what can now only be described as lukewarm chocolate and immediately after she starts to cry. It's not that girlie, sounds as if they're being strangled crying—but big tears, no sound and red eyes."
quote: "\"Jesus.\" I have the tendency to default to a Lord I don't even know exists or other one-word icebreakers in times like this. After a brief moment, she lays it on me."
quote: "\"What kind of a dick dumps his girlfriend and leaves her outside to freeze? I mean, I know we weren't doing well but to leave me out here without a phone? He took my fucking phone.\""
quote: "\"Sounds like a class act. A real scholar amongst men.\""
quote: "\"Well hopefully he got hit by a semi or a school bus or something on his way home.\" An awkward pause is inevitable when you picture the death of someone in a really sudden and traumatic way. This moment was no different. \"Too soon?\""
quote: "She bursts out laughing. Her red, sad eyes have lit up in a way that takes me aback. It's like when you see an old picnic table. The paint is chipping and the wood is grey. Then it rains and suddenly there is new shine brought to that old table. Her tears and her smile came together to bring a shine to her eyes I had never seen before. Fuck—I'm in trouble, is all I can remember thinking."
quote: "I was staring and I think she noticed but she broke the awkward moment without making a big deal out of it. \"Well you know my story. Are you really out here to find yourself?\""
quote: "\"Sarcasm noted. But yes. Sometimes there's just too much going on and I need it all to stop. So I come here.\""
quote: "She looks out the windshield at the snowy hills created by the plows. \"To the mountains.\""
quote: "So cute, I think to myself. \"Closest thing we've got any ways.\" Winnipeg is a Prairie town. There are no mountains for at least 1,000 miles. It's quite flat and plain. For her to see an upside in minus forty below weather was quite endearing."
quote: "After about five minutes of random conversation and once she realized that I had everything we could need she agrees to stay and watch a movie before I take her home—the obvious choice, a comedy."
quote: "She got comfortable and removed her jacket to reveal a curvaceous figure that quantifies the need for a view blocker on my lap. This girl was gorgeous from head to toe. Gorgeous in a way I'd never seen before."
quote: "It took fifteen-minutes and I was now able to tell the difference between horny and hooked. I guess that's what happens when you meet your angel. I always laughed when I heard the line I knew I loved you from the start. I was no longer laughing."
quote: "Two movies, four drinks and two bags of chips later—we were in my truck at her doorstep. She still lived with her parents in a modest looking middle-class home. They clearly didn't come from money but given the area and the two vehicles parked outside one could theorize that they were a hard working family."
quote: "Before leaving, she is sure to make me feel good. \"I had a good—actually, I had a great time. Best time I've had in quite awhile.\""
quote: "\"Yeah, me too. Who knew the night would end like this?\""
quote: "\"Well I guess I'll be going. My dad gets up right around now to go to work.\""
quote: "\"Early wake up call. Must be quite the grind he's on.\""
quote: "\"Well okay. Here.\" I write down my number on a piece of paper. \"If you don't get back together with the dick it'd be groovy if you could call me.\""
quote: "\"Do you know what I just realized? We don't even know each other's names.\""
quote: "\"Well consider knowing my name a reward if you call. Otherwise I'll simply be known as that guy you watched a movie with once.\""
quote: "Her giggle is the greatest sound on Earth and that one was all for me. She writes on a piece of paper, folds it, and hands it to me as she jumps out of the truck. Even with her gone I can't seem to get this stupid grin off of my face. I open up the paper—Mia 554-1632."
quote: "Mia. That is the perfect name for such a girl. It's not too assuming like a Catherine or ugly like a Marsha."
quote: "It's amazing how one random moment can shape your mindset and give you a fresh outlook. I wasn't thinking of latex, nightclubs, threesomes, Kim, money—none of it—just her."
quote: "When you meet a Mia, as a guy, you immediately think about what it is you have to do to clean your life up and be worthy of getting such a wicked chica. That's after you think, God I want to see her naked of course. The stupid little grin was not going away."
quote: "The next week was hell. I had decided that I wouldn't be calling her because there was a chance she'd gotten back together with her ex and the call would just make things awkward. There was also the chance that I caught her at a moment of weakness and she wanted nothing else to do with me. I figured I'd leave perfection alone if that were the case."
quote: "I must have picked up the phone thirty times over six days but my intelligence—and maybe a bit of fear—locked in and I never got past dialing the first three numbers."
quote: "\"Dude. Get over it.\" That, the most common phrase from my buddy Penn over the past few days which, on this particular night, was meant to be some sort of argument to get me to go out and act as a wingman at The Roxy Bar."
quote: "\"I'm not going. I'm just going to stay in and work.\""
quote: "Disappointed he rips into me a bit, \"Look my girl left me and she's not calling. This girl has had plenty of opportunity but she's not calling either. She probably thinks—what the fuck was I doing sitting in some strange guy's truck watching comedies and eating chips?\""
quote: "A week earlier Penn's teenage girlfriend left him for the star quarterback of her high school's football team."
quote: "\"Then. But, I'm not the strange guy anymore. I'm the guy that was there to help with her break up.\""
quote: "\"You know how girls are these days. They're probably back together. Hell for all you know he was waiting for her when she got home and took a few makeup rounds out of her.\""
quote: "This is why two guys, broken by women should not be allowed to hang out—even the weakest of arguments somehow make sense. Just picturing some other guy with his penis all over her made me want to gag. I grabbed my stuff and we headed out to the club—big mistake for you see at a nightclub it's too loud to hear your phone. Big mistake, for of course, this is when she decides to call."
quote: "At the club, Penn decides that the brunette dancing on stage with the band is going to be his latest victim. That after, the blonde, the red head, and the chubby girl all rejected him. He points her out as if it's that easy. Point and they shall come. Bullshit. We'd been standing around for two-hours and he had yet to get any girl to pay attention."
quote: "\"That girl?\" Dustin replies with disgust. \"I heard she's got the herp.\""
quote: "Penn can't take his eyes off her. \"Fuck it. Almost everyone has herpes these days—one in four. They say we should all just go and get it so we're not worried about a few little bumps. That shit cures cancer.\""
quote: "\"Wait, herpes cures cancer?\" I'm dying to hear where he got this info."
quote: "\"Yeah man. I read it online—some medical journal thinger. Apparently, it does some weird dance with your immune system and—well it doesn't cure—but it can prevent. So really, I'm just trying to save myself. I'd rather scratch than be bald.\""
quote: "\"That's fucking disgusting,\" I interject. \"If that's what I have to look forward to—fuck dating. I'm disease free and would like to stay that way.\""
quote: "Penn shoots back with some solid reasoning—in his head. \"If she's got herpes it probably means she's down to bone because it probably means she's been with tons of guys and I'm not saying I want herpes but if you believe all the rumors then every girl in this city has herpes and we're fucked either way.\""
quote: "\"Sounds like you found your perfect match you dirty douche bag. You go get the clap, the herp or another fucked up disease. I'm going home.\""
quote: "\"You're a pussy,\" Penn calls out. \"You're letting a girl ruin the club. Fag.\""
quote: "\"So what? I go home to some Die Hard and you go home to get something you'll need a cream to cover up. Who's the loser in this scenario?\" I shout out."
quote: "It took me about fifteen-minutes to get out of the bar. Penn and Dustin told everyone about Mia. Naturally, they all had to ask about her or rip me a bit for being hung up on someone I only met once. To be honest I really wasn't game for the loud pounding bass and the 500 people crammed into a room that should probably only hold 300 tops anyway. The six beers didn't make it any better either."
quote: "I didn't even notice the voicemail from Mia until I got home, half cut, lying in bed. The annoying blinking light on my phone kept flashing and lighting up my entire room. I'm drunk tired so barely coherent but the first syllable in the voicemail made me shoot up in bed hitting my forehead on the headboard. I dropped the phone and yelped. \"FUCK!\"—My favorite word."
quote: "I rushed into the washroom and grabbed a towel. There's some blood. I opened the medicine cabinet but I was in such a state that I didn't notice the giant contact solution bottle that I left on top, half hanging on the door. It flips down, hits me in the eye and the tab cuts my cheek. I was now bleeding from the cheek, the head and I surely was going to have a black eye in the morning. None of it matters though. Through my drunken haze, I remember why this series of unfortunate events occurred—the voicemail."
quote: "\"Hey strange mountain man. This is Mia. I guess you're busy. I wanted to give this some time to make sure I didn't go back to the dick. Well...I haven't. You were super sweet and I figured since we have the same taste in movies we'd hit one soon. This time on a much bigger screen though k? Well you have my number. I hope I hear from you. Good night.\""
quote: "And so started my journey with the angel—or so I thought."
quote: "PHONE TAG. It was four days since the voicemail and I hadn't been able to reach Mia. I left a couple of messages—any more would seem like desperation. I couldn't get over one thought—who leaves a voicemail, gets a voicemail, then doesn't call back after four days? This is definitely a new one."
quote: "Dopamine is the chemical that controls addiction. The more you respond to something positively the more dopamine flows through your body. The more dopamine—the more addicted you become. That crash or withdrawal from your addiction is the dopamine retreating and being absorbed. This chemical is nature's cruel little control."
quote: "Rationally speaking I must really like this girl if this much dopamine is running through my body. I know—I'm such a romantic right? I bleed Shakespeare. Where art thy dopamine?"
quote: "The real question is why am I hanging on the edge of my seat? Why, after only one occasion of meeting this girl, am I pacing my floor, looking at my phone, wondering when she's going to call again?"
quote: "When I closed my eyes I could picture her lips, her eyes, her curves, and when I listened I could hear her laugh. Were these enough reasons to justify this feeling? If I spilled what I was thinking to her, she'd probably think I'm crazy. But, fuck it. I couldn't get rid of this sick feeling in my stomach and I was tired of waiting. I had to see her."
quote: "As I pull up to the house where I dropped her off that night, I get a sinking feeling in my stomach. Getting out of my truck, I notice a lot of action coming in and out of her house."
quote: "I stop a guy leaving her place. \"What's going on here?\""
quote: "\"My cousin is moving in,\" says the guy and he continues on."
quote: "\"What happened to the people that lived here?\" I shout out."
quote: "\"Well if there's someone moving in that means someone moved out right?\" Everyone's sarcastic these days. \"I doubt my cousin would know where they went though, he's not from around here.\""
quote: "So. No phone call back and she moved. Now what? I sit down on the curb, bummed out. I feel like I'm never going to find this girl. Last time I ran a Facebook search for Mia from Winnipeg it came back with over 120 women and quite a few didn't have pictures. Talk about frustration."
quote: "\"Hey chap, what'd you do to your face?\" An older guy dressed like a biker is standing over me questioning my wounds from the headboard and contact bottle incident."
quote: "\"Long story which, of course, all goes back to a girl.\""
quote: "\"I may never know, can't find her.\" He starts to walk away. \"Hey, you don't know the girl that lived here, do you? Mia.\""
quote: "I jump to my feet. \"Maybe. Don't know much about her.\""
quote: "\"But yet, you're here sitting on a curb looking like God just stole your puppy.\""
quote: "\"God is the move. She's the puppy. Can you help me find her?\""
quote: "He examines my body language for a minute—probably looking for any sign that would indicate sincere or stalker. \"Look, if you didn't give off such a desperate vibe and if you didn't look like you just got in a fight with Mike Tyson, I might have done that for you. Best I can do is if I hear from them, I tell the little lass you're looking for her.\""
quote: "Hope fades. \"Okay man. Thanks. My name is Jason. She has my number.\""
quote: "When I get home, I feel even worse than when I left. I give off a desperate vibe? That's not good. There's nothing extraordinary about desperate."
quote: "Christmas is only a few days away and I'm running around the city in the freezing cold looking for a girl I only met once. What has become of me? I'm in a sad, sad state."
quote: "The next twenty-four hours consist of work I'm barely paying attention to and movies featuring Arnold, Stallone, and The Rock. I must reclaim my manhood. When a real world search, Facebook search and now no call back for a week all end with no results I need to stop pouting and delve into some man movies."
quote: "My last attempt at finding her was posting a status on Facebook; \"Anyone know a girl named Mia with brown hair, hot, used to live in the Empress area?\" I know what you're thinking—and yes, that biker had me pegged. As I was typing it, I knew this approach probably won't work but with over 3,000 friends in one city, you never know."
quote: "I started to fall asleep when I began contemplating how I got here. Why are all of my friends—except Penn, but he deserves what he gets—in great relationships and I can't seem to find anyone as cool as their girls?"
quote: "\"I get money....I, I get money....I run New York!\""
quote: "As I woke up from a haze, I realized I should really change my ringtone. Half dead, I saw it was my cousin Tom. We spoke earlier in the day and he said he'd call and see if I wanted to come to his staff Christmas party—that is, if it was good. At this point, I didn't care if his boss was acting like Oprah and giving everyone a new car just for attending. I was not in party mode."
quote: "The phone rings again. \"I'm trying to sleep!\" I shout out as if Tom will somehow hear me and stop calling. Annoyed, I pitch my phone into the kitchen."
quote: "I just start to dose off again, about ten-minutes later, when I hear a knock. As I get up and make my way to the door, I'm inventing new ways to hurt whoever is behind it. It's also dawned on me that I spend a lot of time trying to escape the world."
quote: "I open the door to see Tom standing there wearing a Santa hat, with a shit eating grin on his face. \"I thought you were at a Christmas party,\" I say as I walk away."
quote: "\"Well, I was, but then I found you a present and I had to bring it by.\""
quote: "I make my way back to the couch, \"Unless it's a girl named Mia...fuck...off.\""
quote: "That wasn't Tom's voice. That was...I turn around to see—Mia. Great, I'm in sweats and a T-shirt, with some half naked chick on it. I would never wear this gear for anything but bumming around the house. I don't want her to judge me because of the shirt so I hastily take it off—awkward. I can see she's starting to think I'm a bit of a freak. She takes one step back as I search frantically for another shirt."
quote: "\"Um...okay, well...the Christmas party was in the building down the street. I saw your Facebook status, looked up and was like holy shit! She was literally being introduced to the people next to me right then. Fate or something.\""
quote: "Tom has now faded to the background as I get that stupid grin back on my face again. She's all done up for a party with dark makeup around her eyes, wavy hair and just enough cleavage to make a man drool. \"Oh my God. What did you do to your face?\" she asks."
quote: "\"After I called you he came over. The door was open because we were moving...\""
quote: "She wants to ask how but continues. \"We were moving and he walked right in. We started arguing. He grabbed my phone when I went to call my dad and smashed it—goodbye contacts. With the move I haven't had time to get a new one and who knows where the paper went with your number on it.\""
quote: "\"Fucker.\" There's that one word response of mine again."
quote: "The gap between us is now closing. One step back, five steps forward. The sexual tension is making the air thick. \"I couldn't help it. I went to see you because you weren't getting back to me and found you gone.\""
quote: "At this point, I have no control over what I'm saying. We both look a bit high. Our eyes are fixated on each other and we're talking through our breath. We're close—very close. I touch her arm sending the little hairs on both of our body's straight up."
quote: "The kiss is inevitable. Our mouths are close. Before I can move in, she tucks her forehead against my nose, blocking it. \"It's Christmas. You can't have a first kiss on Christmas without mistletoe. And your place isn't exactly festive.\""
quote: "She's right. There's no tree, no decorations—you'd never know the jolly holiday was upon us. It's not exactly inspiring for a big moment like this."
quote: "I don't know if she was testing my resourcefulness in such a situation or if she's just shy but I'm equal to the task. A couple of days before, one of the suggested apps on the App Store was mistletoe displayed on the screen with cheesy Holiday music. I whip out my iPhone and hold it above our heads."
quote: "Slowly, we kiss to the sounds of I Saw Mommy Kissing Santa Claus. Actually, I don't even know if this would be accurately described as a kiss. There has to be a more poignant word. Something that marks how monumentally amazing this really is. When a kiss leaves you both shaking, it's something more. It's the start of something incredible...Heaven perhaps? Nope. That's excessively cheesy. I think I'll throw out another one word description here."
quote: "PROFESSIONALLY, life was moving in the right direction. I was promoted to general manager and given an ownership stake in Opium, in lieu of a raise. The bank gave me a loan with my ownership of the club as collateral, which I used to open up a lounge. Both businesses were booming—when I was paying attention. The thing about a girl like Mia is that she can really be quite the distraction."
quote: "We'd only been together for a very short time but in that time, we had spent every waking second together. December 23rd was the night of the party and the mistletoe kiss that Mia marks as the cutest moment of her life. It's now New Year's Eve and we had decided that on this night we will get it on to some Barry White—my words, not hers."
quote: "Mia didn't want everyone knowing her business so we decided to remain a secret. Everything in my life had become too public anyway. When you run a club, everyone finds your life so fucking interesting. Worse, yet—everyone has an opinion."
quote: "I picked up Mia from her friend's place. We couldn't keep our hands off each other. \"So where's the hotel?\""
quote: "\"Good. I want to be between the sheets for the countdown.\""
quote: "\"Well it's a damn good thing I checked us in earlier then huh?\""
quote: "After some fumbling, we were in the room tearing off each other's clothes. Passion was in the air. Her shirt, my shirt. Her pants, my pants. She got up on the bed and stripped away her bra and panties, leaving only my boxers. Jumping off the bed, she pulled them down. At this point, you could have heard a cricket chirp."
quote: "\"What's wrong?\" she asks in disappointment but with sweet concern as well."
quote: "\"And you say some of my jokes are bad.\" I fall onto the bed embarrassed. My erection had decided to hide from the world—no latex, no cold, and no excuses."
quote: "She looks up at me with a devious squint of the eyes, \"Are you nervous Mr. Mytez?\""
quote: "\"I've never asked you this before but are you a...you know?\""
quote: "I'm puzzled for about a quarter of a second, \"What? No. Are you kidding me? I don't know what's going on.\""
quote: "\"Maybe you just like me too much,\" she says as she puts her head on my chest looking up at me with big puppy dog eyes."
quote: "Upon further thought, I blurt out, \"Maybe you're right.\""
quote: "\"Do tell. I think I like where this is going.\" The thing about Mia is that she's wicked smart but likes games. She knew where this conversation was headed and since I'm not a big talker—she gave me a little push."
quote: "I got up and threw on my boxers, pacing the room, \"I mean—we've been hanging out every day since just before Christmas and every time we're together it's better than the last. We have pretty much all of the same interests, except your obsession with reality TV—which I still don't get. How can you like that shit?\" I can feel my speech accelerating but I can't stop what's coming. \"You're beautiful. Beautiful in a way I can't even describe and I have to keep it all a secret. It sucks because you're the type of girl that a guy is proud to call his girl. You're awesome and I can't help but...\""
quote: "\"Which guys?\" she asks, knowing what I'm saying—continuing to push."
quote: "\"You know. Those guys—statistics. Crazy obsessed Harry Potter fans that get the attention of a girl and then...\""
quote: "She made her way over to me now and was standing on the bed naked in the dark hotel room. The moonlight was catching her figure, making the perfect silhouette with just a bit more detail."
quote: "She looked me deep in the eyes, wanting me to say it, \"And then?\""
quote: "\"And then...\" I take a deep breath before continuing. That sparkle in her eye, the way her teeth slightly grip her lip, I'm in a trance, \"Is this that ridiculous thing that everyone calls, love?\""
quote: "Immediately she blushed and couldn't help but smile from ear to ear. \"Yeah, I think so.\""
quote: "We stop. We're both breathing hard. We really take each other in and together, untimed we whisper it, \"I love you.\""
quote: "I thought the first kiss was passionate. This was headline worthy. When we parted, her whole body was shaking. \"You know what?\""
quote: "\"Looks like all you had to do was get that off your chest because Mr. Mytez, I do believe that is a very impressive tent you're pitching.\""
quote: "We both looked down and the boxers came off. We spent the next hour between the sheets and we didn't care if it was midnight or not. New Year's Eve, the new year, none of it mattered. It wasn't washroom floor sex or a random fling. This was the first time I was making love to a woman."
quote: "You know in the movies when you see them caressing each other's skin and you can't quite understand how that particular act is getting them off? Well I now do. In fact, there are plenty of movie moments, which all of a sudden make sense."
quote: "There's no chance you'll see me quoting sappy shit-box movies like The Notebook but I do have a better understanding of City of Angels because of her. After we make love, we cuddle and talk all night. We leave no stone unturned. We talk about our dreams, our exes, how we want to introduce the other to our friends and family, the whole enchilada."
quote: "\"So does this mean I have to change my relationship status on Facebook?\" I ask, being my usual sarcastic self."
quote: "\"Well you could not but then I'll be gone. Your choice.\""
quote: "\"Aren't you going to lose a bit of an edge being unavailable? Isn't it the nightclub motto appear single without being single?\""
quote: "\"Fuck the motto darling. If people don't like the me that comes with you, then I just tell those people to go fuck themselves and I do something else. I don't even really like managing a nightclub anyways. It's getting too ridiculous as a lifestyle choice.\""
quote: "\"Does this mean you're going to be getting out of it soon? Because that would be terrible.\""
quote: "\"Do I detect a hint of sarcasm...again? Can't handle the job already?\""
quote: "\"Eventually. I need some sort of a back up first—some kind of a plan. I run a club and a lounge and I don't even like clubbing. Maybe I should just sell my stake and run away to some warm locale with you.\""
quote: "\"And I'll follow. Don't think I won't.\" There's something so hot about a woman that has your back. Round two—even if it is five-thirty in the morning."
quote: "FASTER THAN A SPEEDING BULLET. That's how quickly things progressed with Mia. Before I knew it, we were living together and were the proud parents of two cats named Conan and Misty. It was a matter of months before we were spending every waking moment together."
quote: "We got a house right in the middle of the city so that I was just 5 minutes from my job, she—5 minutes from hers and we were no more than 10 minutes from anything. It was a nice little side-by-side with arched doorways and warm colored walls. I remember the walls specifically because I hate white. It's boring and sterile. Everyone has white, so when we saw the house for the first time, I immediately wanted it just because of the walls. Never mind the ugly appliances or the creaky floors."
quote: "Upstairs we had a giant bedroom and there was a small office right next to it. The main floor had a big living room, tiny dining room, and a hideous kitchen. The only time we ever ate in the dining room was when our parents came over for dinner so the table often became the place we would throw stuff down as we walked in."
quote: "Our lives were busy. I was running Opium still, which was a constant battle. I also had the lounge and an event company called G1. There was more money coming in than ever before and that kept me fairly settled in the business world. I wanted to get into some charity work but I was already so busy between actual work and my relationship. Mia was working as a manager at a local restaurant and she helped where she could with any big events my team and I was throwing."
quote: "Despite our crazy schedules, I managed to get the slow dances that I had with Lillian, the wild sex that I had with the sluts of my life and I had the warm and fuzzies that I hadn't gotten from anyone. It was a nice life—when Conan wasn't chewing on my computer cords."
quote: "One day Mia came home from the grocery store with a story that threatened to throw that nice life off balance, \"So I met someone you know—or knew. A girl named Kim.\""
quote: "\"Kim Rosenboam?\" My heart sunk into my stomach. Mia and I agreed to not talk about our relationships and flings before each other. Hearing about a threesome in the staff washroom would probably just get her curiosity going regarding what happens when she's not around."
quote: "\"Ya. Cute girl. Gonna look great when she's 50.\""
quote: "\"At the grocery store. She said she moved to Texas but is in town with her boyfriend from the States on a vacation, so I invited them over for dinner.\""
quote: "\"Really?\" I was taken aback. The last time Kim and I saw each other things didn't go so well. \"And she said yes?\""
quote: "\"No reason. Just haven't seen her since she quit at Opium.\""
quote: "From Mia's tone, I could tell that Kim hadn't told her why she quit. I was hoping it was in the past; otherwise, dinner wasn't going to be very hospitable. There is actually a chance that Mia wouldn't care but it's a chance I wasn't willing to place bets on. When life is going good, you don't just throw in a complication for fun—unless you're an idiot. Mia didn't like the club business already. Without confirmation that her boyfriend lived that lifestyle to the fullest, she could live in denial."
quote: "Later that night Kim and her boyfriend Brad showed up for dinner. We actually cleared off the dining room table for the feast. Mia cooked up my favorite chicken dish with all the trimmings. The conversations were light and there was plenty of laughter to go around. Kim filled Mia in on some of crazier things I had done in the earlier days of Opium but didn't offer the really dirty facts. It loosened me up."
quote: "Brad was a pretty nice guy as well. The two of them were very affectionate, which was a completely different side of Kim I hadn't seen before. She seemed genuinely happy, much like Mia and I."
quote: "Towards the end of the dinner, Brad mentioned that he and his brother tried to jail break his phone before the trip to Canada and now it was barely working."
quote: "\"You know Brad, my angel here is quite the techie. Maybe she can get your phone going,\" I suggested with pride."
quote: "\"Is that so?\" Brad seemed excited about getting his phone up and running. \"Mia if you wouldn't mind, I'd be greatly appreciative if you could take a look at it.\""
quote: "\"I don't see why not. Besides, it'll give Jason and Kim a chance to catch up without their better halves eavesdropping.\""
quote: "As Mia and Brad headed for the office upstairs, Kim and I just kind of stared at each other for about a minute. It was extremely awkward—one of those moments where you wish a car would come right through your living room to distract from what was coming."
quote: "I needed to break the tension. I'm not good with uncomfortable silences and I had no more peas to pick at. \"I'm gonna go sit on the deck and smoke a joint. You're welcome to join me.\""
quote: "Outside, I lit up a nice sized j and sat down on the peeling deck. I told Mia I'd paint this thing forever ago and she hasn't bitched once about it not being done. Kristian took the garbage out to the curb a day late once and his girl cut him off for two weeks—more reason to appreciate the shit out of Mia. After about a minute of looking at the sky and puffing on nature's medicine, Kim came outside and sat next to me."
quote: "\"I didn't know you smoked weed.\" I couldn't tell if she was disgusted or disappointed."
quote: "\"I picked it up a few months ago. It calms the nerves—helps me to relax.\""
quote: "\"I can see why you do it then. I never will.\""
quote: "Again, a few moments go by and then she drops the bomb. \"A threesome right in front of me, really?\""
quote: "I choked a bit on the weed. \"Straight to the point, huh? I've played this conversation in my mind a thousand times and you can't be mad at me. You had a genuine cowboyfriend from Texas and it seems to have worked out pretty good for you.\""
quote: "\"No, I didn't actually. You just believed the gossip. We were seeing each other at that point but it wasn't official—and it wasn't official because I really liked you. But then you went and had sex with those two girls.\" Kim was actually giving me some 'tude for the first time."
quote: "\"Well I'm sorry I misread the situation but you left for a couple of months and came back talking about some guy—a guy is gonna take that as a fuck off.\""
quote: "She deflates a bit. At first, she seemed angry. Now she seemed disappointed. \"Why couldn't you have just asked me?\""
quote: "I have to be careful with my answer. If I piss her off, she could cause issues for Mia and I. If I'm too sensitive to her needs, I could complicate things with her. Fuck it—I just decided to be honest."
quote: "\"Because guys like me don't get girls like you. It's against nature...or something.\" I pause, take a deep breath, and then let it all out. \"Relationships have always confused the shit out of me. Why do people cheat? Why do they say I love you without actually experiencing it? Then, there's my business. Why would any girl want a guy who makes a living off of girls getting hammered, then waking up the next morning to feel an ache in between their legs and not know why? I didn't get with you Kim because guys like me aren't good for girls like you. Mia is perfect because she has a more realistic view on the world than you do. I didn't want to take that away.\""
quote: "I sounded like a martyr but that's okay because I felt like one at the time anyway. I was counting on Kim to do the Kim thing—and the good girl didn't disappoint—she saw my pain and let me off the hook. I even got a hug out of the deal."
quote: "\"You have a great girl in Mia. You seem really happy.\""
quote: "\"As do you, so I guess it all worked out in the end for both of us.\""
quote: "\"I guess so.\" She sighs. \"Hopefully it stays that way.\""
quote: "A little high, I decide a conversation with the big man upstairs is in order. \"You hear that God? The good girl is asking for a favor. You created us in your image and she's pretty much the only person left that keeps that up so don't fuck...mess around. Sorry.\""
quote: "Just as she said that, Brad comes outside, beaming about his fixed iPhone. \"That's quite the girl you've got there, Jason.\""
quote: "\"That's for sure,\" Mia says as she walks outside."
quote: "Moments later, Kim and Brad depart. Mia and I lay on the deck looking up at the stars. \"I often wonder how anyone could make sense of all that flicker. I mean, who saw stars and thought, look at that big dipper?\""
quote: "\"Weed makes you strange.\" Mia says. \"But I love your kind of strange. It's cute, in a sad little puppy with no food or water, kind of way.\""
quote: "She eyes my joint, \"You've had enough. My turn.\""
quote: "I love watching her smoke weed. There's something so intensely sexy about it."
quote: "\"So did you and Kim work your shit out?\" She asked, finally giving me an indication that she knew something was up."
quote: "I let out another harsh cough. I was shocked that she knew and even more so that she didn't seem to care."
quote: "\"Um no. I do have other friends. Janice being one of them.\""
quote: "\"Holy shit. You know Janice? How long have you known about it?\""
quote: "\"A while. She told me all about what happened and that you told her about this Kim girl that got hurt in the process. I didn't connect the two Kim's until I saw your reaction to me meeting her this afternoon.\""
quote: "\"So you're not pissed that I had a threesome with one of your friends?\""
quote: "\"Nope.\" She gets up and flicks the joint out onto the sidewalk. With a sexy little look she says, \"Play your cards right and you might get to do it again—she's hot.\""
quote: "\"Just be happy I didn't flip out over you having a threesome with one of my friends and just now, getting excited about the possibility of doing it again.\""
quote: "\"Happy? I'm happy. 'nough said. Case closed.\" I said with a grin as she picked me up off the deck."
quote: "\"C'mon big boy, let's go to bed. My photo shoot is at one and I still need to go get my outfits and makeup done.\""
quote: "The next morning I felt great. I think my angel had a bit of the devil in her last night. She asked me to do some things in the bedroom we had yet to take on together. Me thinks my lady was all hot and bothered by the Janice talk—even if there was no chance of anything happening."
quote: "I only get a few minutes to bask in the morning glow before I see her running around piecing together outfits for her photo shoot. The owner of the restaurant she worked at wanted to be more viral online and had decided since Mia was so hot he'd pay for a shoot and she'd be their poster girl. \"Hurry up, we're going to be late,\" she says."
quote: "I drop her off at her shoot a few minutes early and head off to do some errands. It was one of those days where the sun shined a bit brighter and everything seemed right. The continued serenity in my relationship made everything seem that way—including work."
quote: "It doesn't take long before I get the text Come get me. I immediately get a sinking feeling in my stomach. Mia has not been at the studio long enough to have completed a whole session. There are those moments when you know something really fucked up has happened. Say goodbye to that great feeling of serenity, I kept thinking to myself."
quote: "It took me less than five minutes to get back to the studio when it would usually take fifteen. I was sweating as I raced up the stairs. I got to the third floor but the door to go any further was locked so I waited impatiently for the elevator."
quote: "The elevator took me up to the sixth floor studio and the photographer, Rodney, was immediately on the defense as the doors opened. He's clearly worried about what it is that I was about to find."
quote: "He stammers out a sentence that alone I should have laid a beating on him for. \"She just freaked out man. She must be on something. Maybe someone drugged her. I dunno.\""
quote: "He's frozen with fear and doesn't have the balls to answer me. My chin is itchy—once again indicating rage. I'm tearing open doors with no regard for Rodney's property. I've left him in the other room and as I head towards the washroom, I can hear her crying. This isn't the same kind of crying from that first night. These are big tears with loud, hard breaths."
quote: "When I get in the washroom, I see her half naked and curled up in the corner. There is no way this ends well for anyone. Her face is red and she looks like she's in shock. It actually takes a few seconds for her to realize it is me standing in front of her. I finally get her to snap out of it. She goes on to tell me that the shoot was actually a present for me. The restaurant angle was a cover so I didn't ask questions."
quote: "She was going to do some partial nudes—nothing full on, just suggestive stuff. She tells me that Rodney had gotten carried away. He moved in to fix her hair and she turned her head, which he must have perceived as an opening to kiss her. When she pulled away and slapped him, he pushed her to the floor and then kicked her. As she fell, she had to remove her arms from in front of her breasts. Rodney goes ahead and snaps a picture of her on the mother-fucking floor."
quote: "That's all I needed to hear. Sometimes men can't help but think with their dick. It just takes over. However, if you think with your dick and fuck up—you best believe you're going to be paying for it."
quote: "This whole situation was fucked for a couple of reasons. The first, Rodney knew Mia was my girl and we all ran in the same circles. The second, I'm much bigger than him. I make sure Mia is okay to be alone for a few minutes and then tell her to stay put. She did not want to see what I was going to do to Rodney."
quote: "\"Look man I don't know what she told you but...\" he tries to justify what he has done but I'm not having it."
quote: "Rodney tries to cover up the camera bag with his foot but I see it. Pushing him aside, I rip open the camera bag and go through the pictures. Sure enough, the first picture is Mia on the floor, breasts exposed and a boot print on her stomach. The look on her face was one that I hoped I'd never see—real, hard, disgusting fear."
quote: "\"You're a fucking dead man Rodney,\" I yell out at him as I wind up and throw the camera against the wall. It smashes into a million little thousand-dollar pieces all over the rustic studio floor."
quote: "He tries to make a run for it but I'm taller so my strides are much faster. I catch him as the elevator door is opening. The first hit is to the back of his neck. My fist crunches into his spine. That sends him flying into the wall of the elevator."
quote: "As we tussle, we're slipping on lenses and other gear that he tried to take with him as he made a run for it. I get one hand free and lay a fist into his right cheek. I'm so angry that my force is harder than usual. His cheek cracks under the pressure and my ring tears through his skin. His blood drips onto the dirty floor as he tries to get up but he's dazed. This will be an easy win. I throw him into a corner and hit him hard with knees to the ribs."
quote: "\"Do you know what shit like this does to a girl?\" I'm screaming at him, furious. \"It's going to kill her confidence. You probably just fucked up my girl for life so now I'm returning the favor.\""
quote: "He drops to the ground again, wincing in pain and crying. I lay a hard left boot to the side of his head. In fact, it's a jumping boot with my full weight behind it. I want to kill this guy, so I don't even notice how fragile this really old school elevator is. When I come down on his face, there is a rumble and then the elevator drops. These downtown studios are rarely kept to code and for nostalgic reasons they keep the old elevators. I remember the debate in the papers as to whether they're safe or not—I guess not."
quote: "It's just six floors but the bottom is made of old boards and they do not withstand the fall. When we hit the ground the floor comes rushing in which sends me flying. Think of a teeter-totter with you on one end and Andre the Giant jumping on the other—whatever is above you—your head is going to be meeting it."
quote: "I vaguely remember the moments after the crash. Mia was screaming from above as I was losing consciousness. I couldn't see much but I do distinctly remember my boot. It was right by my head—whether my foot was in it or not was a question I didn't get to answer before I passed out."
quote: "I woke up in the hospital barely conscious and my whole body ached. I was a bit foggy on the details but still instinctively knew that I was worried about Mia before I was there. Luckily, she was sitting right next to my bed when I came to."
quote: "\"Oh thank God.\" She lets out a sigh of relief."
quote: "\"What happ...\" I feel the pressure in my head for the first time and moan in pain. After getting my composure a bit, I finish my question. \"What happened? Why does my head hurt like a bitch?\""
quote: "She goes on to tell me the story and it all comes back to me. She tells of how he went for the kiss, which led to the elevator dropping."
quote: "\"He's at a different hospital. There were so many fire trucks, cops, and ambulances. After I told them what happened they felt it would be best to separate you two. He's in pretty rough shape but he'll survive.\""
quote: "\"Nope. It was kind of a trade off. He doesn't get arrested for assaulting me and you don't get arrested for assaulting him. He agreed, I agreed. We were lucky to get the cops that we did.\""
quote: "\"Shit. You don't get any kind of justice out of this thing.\""
quote: "\"Are you kidding me? You beat the hell out of him. He's going to be walking funny for months, if not the rest of his life. A board went through his leg! That's reward enough.\""
quote: "We both share a bit of a chuckle over Rodney's misfortune—mine followed by more wincing."
quote: "\"I should kill him when I get out of here.\""
quote: "\"Look, I get it. You have to be the man but I love you and it's time to grow up Jason. You can't just go around killing people. If we're going to build any kind of a life together you gotta know that it's time to deal with things in a bit of a different way. That's not to say I wasn't happy to see him lying on that stretcher but I don't want you going to jail or something. We have a life to build and I know this is going to take me some time to get over—I need you.\""
quote: "Her logic is undeniable. \"You're right. You've been sitting here rehearsing that, haven't you?\""
quote: "\"Well, good delivery, Angel. Whatever you need me to do, you know I'll do it.\""
quote: "\"Just stop milking it and get out of this bed so we can go home, k?\""
quote: "She kisses me so softly—almost as if she's trying to not break anything. It feels good though. It's a my hero kiss which I've always wanted since I was a little kid in my parent's basement wearing superhero pajamas. The hero always gets this great kiss from the woman he wants. I guess all it took was dropping an elevator on me."
quote: "Sure, Mia wasn't raped and she would be okay physically but Rodney took some power away and humiliated her. This wasn't going to be easy to get over. Good thing neither of us were alone. We had each other to fight whatever was thrown at us."
quote: "This is real love and reality tried to take us down—literally."
quote: "THE FUNNY THING ABOUT LOVE is that no matter how good the beginning makes you feel, somehow you lose the ambition to maintain that level of passion. Come to think of it—that's not funny at all."
quote: "Most relationships consist of several scenes from various movies that you can stitch together to make that particular love story. We see love on the silver screen and then the credits roll. I think the problem is that we don't actually see that period where the reality of life gets in the way and it could all go to shit."
quote: "We sit behind screens and watch stories that we then try to emulate. Where the fuck has the creativity in love gone? We no longer think of bitchin' ways to make our significant others swoon. We rent the idea from Blockbuster and hope she hasn't seen that particular oohie gooie movie. However, once again, reality has to set in eventually. We've all done it."
quote: "Even Mia and I have made the mistake of letting comfort take over passion. Just over a year after that first, I love you, and we've let hot nights of desire turn into passing out in bed after long days at work. Presents for no reason have become presents with apologies. Dinners out have become take-out and even when we recognize this we can't seem to do anything to reverse the cataclysmic event that we seem to be speeding towards—boredom."
quote: "It took a few months for me to heal from my elevator injuries. I ended up with a concussion, broken leg, cracked ribs, and a completely smashed pelvic bone. The rehab took months. I found comfort in the fact that I was home long before Rodney though."
quote: "The problem at this point was that Mia and I were slipping away. Problems kept stacking up. Her work was crazy. My injuries limited what we could do and as active people, that was a huge issue. My online popularity grew and so too did my workload. I was now an online sensation, owner of a club and lounge as well as a promotions company."
quote: "We were a power couple and it now made sense that so many power couples crumble. The bigger you get, the more demanding the people become. My incoming emails had gone from about a hundred a day to more than a thousand. Everyone wanted a piece and if I didn't give the people what they wanted, I wouldn't make money."
quote: "There was also the constant reminder of what happened between her and Rodney. Due to the way I handled things, the whole incident became quite public. As a result, it seemed like everywhere we went people wanted to talk to her about it. Couple that with her having to pass the studio every day on her way to work and she was barely coping."
quote: "Life was telling me to make a choice—love or money. I'm not sure why I couldn't have both but it just didn't seem to be in the cards for a guy like me. In a bid to keep my relationship alive with Mia and to get her away from the drama, I concocted a little plan."
quote: "\"I'm selling the companies and I think we should move to Miami in a couple of weeks.\" I throw this out there with no prior reasoning or indication that it is coming."
quote: "\"I always tell you how amazing Miami is. I want you to experience it with me. There's not much for us here if I sell the companies. Our parents are still young so they can come see us whenever they want. Our friends for the most part are either boring, shitty or full of shit. Why do another winter in Winnipeg when we could be clubbing and sitting pool side?\""
quote: "When I was a kid, my father got transferred to Miami for work and I never could get the city out of the back of my mind. Miami had an energy I loved and the climate she loved."
quote: "She's shocked at the move but not appalled. She's scanning my face, looking for any kind of a wavering but I don't give way. I want this because I want her and I feel like if we don't leave this hole we will be doomed. I, of course, don't tell her that's the reason I want to make the move."
quote: "\"Why not? Just think—new city, new restaurants, epic shows, the ocean, new clubs and palm trees. We used to be so adventurous but Winnipeg has done what it was gonna do for us, and what it done did sucks large testis. I'm pretty much healed up from my mini-UFC match. The timing couldn't be better.\" I can see the glimmer in her eye. \"Just think of the damage we can do. Why Miami? With the money I'll make selling the club and lounge, I could actually just do the podcast until we figure out what's next. It's a good life and we deserve some good. Angel, you deserve some good.\""
quote: "She takes a moment. She's looking for reasons to stay but can't think of any. The jeopardy time sound plays in my head before she answers. \"Ok.\""
quote: "\"Ok! Let's do it. Why stay here? I'm killing myself for a job that doesn't pay that well and this will be your chance to get out of the club business...which I've been waiting for since we got together. A change of scenery could really change things for us.\""
quote: "I did a couple of G1 events before leaving to pad the pocket and we were off. Four stops and two weeks later we are in Miami. The new car smell was gone for me, having lived there but for her, that wide-eyed girl that knocked on my window over a year ago was back. It makes this sad case of a man happy, just to see that look on her face again."
quote: "We hit the shows we wanted to see, ate where we wanted to eat, danced where we wanted to dance—the good life I believe it's called."
quote: "Miami is a beautiful city at night. You have the best of both worlds—nature and a huge metropolis area. I felt comfortable and enjoyed every second. Mia was a huge fan of many of the aspects of Miami but I could see sadness in her eyes, and the sadness was becoming more frequent."
quote: "I hated Winnipeg with extreme prejudice. For me, that city was a bloodsucker. I couldn't sleep, I had to constantly deal with other people's issues, and it was where I lived for most of my life so the problems felt like they were stacked on top of each other. While at home, Mia felt the same but after months of basking in the Miami sun, she was getting home sick. I, did not share in the yearning to return."
quote: "Back in Canada, we argued about rumors and the club life. In Miami, we were arguing about going back home and money. The gravy train from the sale of my shares couldn't last forever and she was extremely concerned about it. The podcast was bringing in money but eventually it wouldn't sustain our lifestyle. I've always been able to roll with the punches. She's more of a planning type of girl."
quote: "I feared that there was a flaw in my plan. I thought that running to Miami would have us running far from our problems but I was starting to learn that the problem was not our setting—it was us. No matter how similar we may be, there were these few differences, which were major issues."
quote: "Having spent nearly every day together for more than a year, the thought starts to creep into our heads that maybe the differences make us too different to stay together. Maybe, space was needed."
quote: "It was October 26 and we decided to have one of those fancy dinners at a fancy restaurant. For the first 15 minutes of the meal anyone watching would have mistaken us for an 80-year-old couple—we were silent. Up until now, I had always made jokes about people like that and vowed that if this ever happened to me with a girl—it'd be over."
quote: "Then I say something I never thought would come out of my mouth. \"Has this run its course?\""
quote: "\"Me too. Who knows how we got here but it fucking sucks, Jason. I thought this was a forever thing.\""
quote: "\"We thought we were above it all because back home we were. At least there, we had a lot more going on and that distracted us from what was really going on between us. Here, our problems are in stereo.\""
quote: "\"You brought us here to get away from the problems, didn't you?\""
quote: "I could tell that she saw right through me the whole time. \"Yep. Pretty much.\""
quote: "She touches my face. \"Coming here helped me get past Rodney's attack, so for that, I'm going to always owe you. You really put yourself out there to help me.\" She's now fighting back the tears, \"I love you.\""
quote: "\"Wow. We're all grown up. Look at this mutual breakup we've got going on here.\""
quote: "We finish our dinner and enjoy one last dance on the patio of the restaurant, overlooking the ocean. We kiss and share some tears then Mia calls her parents and makes plans to come home. I have no interest in returning. October 26 we broke up. October 27 and 28, we basically locked ourselves in the bedroom and made love. October 29 she was on a plane back to Winnipeg."
quote: "Before she got on the plane she handed me a note while tears streamed down our faces and then she was gone. This is wrong but necessary. My tears turn to full on crying. I can barely see but her words are all I have left so I read the note right there."
quote: "\"You know I'm not good with things like this...expressing myself. But I want to thank you for everything you've ever done for me. I feel like my life would have missed something without having you in it. I'm going to love you forever.\""
quote: "The letter was actually several pages, but that was the gist of it. I served my purpose and she'll love me forever. If that sounds bitter and angry, it should. We dated for long enough that anyone in my place would question whether they had wasted their time. In the end, I was standing in the same place as I was before I met her—figuratively of course. I went back to our place and hit the gym. In fact, that's pretty much what I did for the next month. I beat the hell out of the punching bag and ran 5 miles a day in the Miami sun."
quote: "Mia and I spoke on the phone occasionally and we had our moments. I figured out pretty quickly after the break up that I wanted her back so I told her as much. She stonewalled me. It would seem breaking up fixed our problems but not mine. This went on for about two weeks until..."
quote: "I was silent for a moment and then tried to cover my disappointment with a joke, \"But is his penis of the proper proportion to satisfy your va-jay-jay?\" Yep, I'm an idiot. \"Too soon?\" I ask."
quote: "\"You did the same thing when we first met. You made fun of the guy in my life and when I didn't respond you asked the exact same question.\""
quote: "\"It's better I mask my contempt for this asshole with a joke than get mad about it.\""
quote: "\"He's not an asshole. You don't even know him.\""
quote: "The conversation pretty much went down hill from there—no clever antidotes or high coos—just angry ranting and finally the slamming of our phones. I sat in my dark condo with my head in my hands—thoughts racing. Some dick wad was getting with my girl! FUCK!"
quote: "I had isolated myself from any real relationships in Miami. My friends back home moved on without me. My parents aren't good in these situations. There's no one to talk to, which is something everyone needs during a break-up. My break up councilor was Mia, which obviously did not work. You need one friend to trash your ex and another to offer sympathy. It's the Western way. Everyone needs that after a break-up. I didn't have any kind of an outlet—then that message."
quote: "Carly was a Winnipeg hottie in high school that got pregnant but still somehow stayed unbelievably smokin'. Her body—well let's just say the Romans would have erected her statue at Caesar's gates. The boob job didn't hurt either. She had a bit of a reputation but as a man who was just shut down and told his angel was with some other penis—that shit just does not matter."
quote: "\"Self-loathing in my new home in Miami.\" I reply."
quote: "I told her the story and that led to texting before bed every night, which led to phone calls pool side, which led to some pretty intense flirting. There was always something—AKA, Mia—looming over every conversation but I chose to ignore those dark clouds above my head. I can honestly say, this was about revenge in the beginning. I wanted Mia to hear about a potential hook-up between us. Along the way though, I learned how cool she was. I actually kinda liked her—kinda."
quote: "One talent this blond bombshell had was phone sex. I'd have to say phone sex with her was better than actual sex with some women. She just knew what I wanted to hear. Sometimes it was frustrating that I wasn't getting actual sex but for now, this was enough."
quote: "Christmas was just around the corner and my mom wanted me home for the Holidays, which opened the door from a world of, look but don't touch."
quote: "I was cautiously excited to tell Carly about my homecoming because I didn't know where this whole thing was headed. Even with doubts on my mind, I jumped on MSN and let her know that we could drop the t in sexting."
quote: "\"Oh so you are going to be in town—interesting.\""
quote: "\"I was thinking since I'll be there do you want to go out?\""
quote: "\"A date? I've never been on a real date before.\""
quote: "\"It's been a long time since I've had a first.\""
quote: "\"I'm sure we could find a couple more in the bedroom.\""
quote: "\"Oh I'm sure we can but I want you to know if you fuck around and hurt me I will cut your balls off.\""
quote: "Even though Carly had a reputation as a slut, there wasn't much new information out there about her. Through talking to her, I learned that she went through her stage but then realized she had to start taking life seriously. She found herself a good job. Now she was looking for a good man. If that sounds familiar—it should. Carly was the very definition of a twenty-first-century experienced woman."
quote: "COMING HOME was complicated. I had a date with a girl that should be on the cover of Playboy but I was still in love with Mia. My mission, should I choose to accept it, was to get Mia back with one remarkably romantic gesture and if not, see where things could go with Carly. If love is torture, everyone was about to feel the love!"
quote: "As soon as I landed, I got a car and headed over to Mia's casa. She had no idea I was coming. It was the middle of the night and I came bearing gifts, which almost broke when she jumped on me. Honest to fucking Christ—I have never seen a girl so happy to see a guy."
quote: "That hug lasted ten minutes if it lasted a second. Her mom came downstairs, happy to see me as well. I was on my way to blissful reconciliation. After present time at the Richardson house, I surprised Mia with the new Will Smith movie, two weeks before it opened. This was no regular bootleg—I had to seriously grease some Hollywood jerk offs to get a screener. It's amazing the people you meet in the Miami nightlife scene."
quote: "As we sat watching the movie it was as if we were at the beginning again. We inched closer but pulled away when we got too close. It was one of those cute sappy moments that guys don't like to admit they've had but we all love having them."
quote: "Once our cinematic adventure was over I readied to leave but Mia stopped me—under the mistletoe. We went to kiss and held less than an inch away from each other's lips. Our eyes closed we could feel each other's souls."
quote: "\"You don't love him. You barely even like him. The proof is under the mistletoe. Pick up the phone, dump him, and kiss me.\""
quote: "The whispers have increased in volume a bit. \"You have one moment to change things in your life. This is it. We had our problems but we're healthier as people now. We had some time apart and it strengthened our feelings. I could feel it the second you saw me standing at your door. This is the moment. If you let me walk out this door, I'm gone forever.\""
quote: "She wants to kiss me but she doesn't. She lets me leave. As I walked to the car, I realized I am in serious need of a joint. Ten minutes later, the haze of a failed reconciliation still hurts. Given that I am no masochist, pain is not a feeling I'm down with."
quote: "The next eight hours were shit. I had to focus on the good though, and the only good was that I had the answer I came home for. It was time for Plan B, also known as Carly. I tried giving her a call but there was no answer, which irked me a bit. How often does a man come thousands of miles for a girl? The least she could do is answer a call for fuck sakes."
quote: "I smoked my way to sleep and woke up the next afternoon with news that I was going to guest host a huge event for 5,000 people. An event that I knew Mia and her friends along with her boyfriend would be attending. After some time with the family, I was off to the Winnipeg Convention Centre."
quote: "I took the stage around eleven and did what I came to do. I was back home on stage, partying with my crew. It was great. Mia was on stage partying with us the entire time too. She became the unofficial go-go dancer for DJ Fin-S, one of Canada's best turntablists. Man she could move. Even though we weren't together, everything felt pretty freakin' dandy. It was in this moment I realized we could have amazing moments without being together. Everything was vibin', even with Ronald in the picture. It didn't hurt that I got to take some jabs at him on the mic either. I finally felt a bit of peace regarding the split."
quote: "I went back stage and called Carly again. This time she answered. \"Hey, are we still on for tomorrow?\""
quote: "\"Of course,\" she replied. \"I saw the first call but ignored it. I said to myself, if he calls again, he's not an asshole.\""
quote: "\"There's plenty of time for you to draw your conclusions about me. Don't count my ability to alienate people out just yet.\""
quote: "\"Well, you go back to Miami in a week. I'm not sure that there is plenty of time.\""
quote: "\"I guess we'll have to make the most of this week then.\""
quote: "I went back to hosting. Mia left with Ronald, or as I so loving referred to him—Mc Dick—and I left alone looking forward to my date."
quote: "I had something planned for Carly that I hoped would take her breath away. I often feel obligated to help people and Carly was a person in need of help. Did she have a shady past in the bedroom? Did the triple D breast implants, bleach blond hair and diva fashions give people a pre-conceived notion before they even got the chance to speak to her? Yes, to all of those questions. However, everyone has a layer below their outward appearance. From what I saw underneath the Gucci and breasts larger than my head, was a wicked person. I figured I'd help her come full circle from slut to twenty-first-century experienced woman."
quote: "I picked Carly up for dinner in the early evening. What a sight. This is one sexy woman, was the only thought I could contain in my head. We talked about everything and true to her texting form—she was witty. I always worry that either I, or someone I meet, won't live up to their SMS self. Texting gives a person the chance to think of something clever. However, when you're live in front of an audience of one, people have to be impulsive to stay in the conversation. She matched up just fine."
quote: "While waiting for her at her house, I met her son—Travis. I'm still not a fan of kids but this 10-year old could make the average adult feel stupid. He was a good kid who threatened my life if I hurt his mother—nicely played kid."
quote: "We settled on The Keg as the restaurant where awkwardly enough Vanessa was our server. Yes, the Vanessa from the latex incident. It worried me a bit. I didn't want Carly to get out of my sight for fear that Vanessa would have some choice words for her. Luckily, she didn't leave the table and it seemed like Vanessa was more interested in showing off her jewelry than revenge."
quote: "\"Wow is she flaunting that ring,\" Carly said with a grin."
quote: "\"What ring?\" I'm always oblivious when it comes to this kind of stuff."
quote: "\"Short of bringing in her fiancé and having sex on our table I don't think she could have made it anymore obvious. You don't notice much about girls do you?\""
quote: "Thank you for the chance to flatter, Miss Evans. \"Well I notice the color of your eyes. I notice the curves of your body and,\" I pause for the dramatic effect. \"I notice the little dimple on the left side of your mouth when a compliment has made you uncomfortable—but in a good way.\""
quote: "In the background, I hear I Wanna Know by Joe. It's one of my favorite slow songs of all time. \"Wanna dance?\""
quote: "\"Why not? We're paying to be here. No reason we shouldn't do whatever we want.\""
quote: "\"If you can't dance I'll understand. If you suck, that's fine, but I feel like dancing with you.\""
quote: "She lets out this little groan, which is her little cute thing that every girl has—the one thing that makes a man melt. We dance. She can't stop giggling. I detect a sign of happiness. While everyone in the restaurant stares, some smiling, most of the dudes pissed that I'm showing them up—she gets closer."
quote: "We continue our dinner, open a couple of Christmas presents, and talk about any subject that pops into our heads. The conversation is revealing. She went through her stage where her legs were open more hours than a 7-11, which is fine because she's disease free and has a very cool son to show for it."
quote: "She's not sure what she wants to do with her life but is confident she'll figure it out. Until then, she has an excellent job and makes plenty of money. I also learn that she's a bit of an exhibitionist. Oh—and don't try to cut her down because she will beat your ass to the ground. She's street smart, cunning, ferociously sexy and she'll do pretty much anything to take care of herself and the people she cares about. She's the girl you want in a hostage situation because the assholes that have you strapped with C4 won't know what hit 'em."
quote: "Dinner wrapped up without incident from Vanessa but it was about an hour too early for the next stage of the night so I needed to kill some time. One thing that my city is great for in winter—Christmas light sightseeing. People really go all out in celebration of the snow. We drove around several neighborhoods and took in the sights. She took my hand, which I wasn't completely comfortable with but I made an exception in an effort to see where this was all heading. It was set to be the perfect date from her perspective."
quote: "Finally, I get the text from Michael, Everything's ready. We head over to a movie theatre. She's curious because it's too late for the theatre to be open. When we get inside, I quickly catch up with Michael, grab some popcorn, which also piques her curiosity, and then head towards a theatre."
quote: "\"I don't get it. You get your own popcorn and isn't it too late for people to be going to a movie?\" She enquires, busting with anticipation."
quote: "As we enter the theatre I simply reply, \"It's too late for other people to be at a movie.\" Man—I felt like the king of the world with that sly little line."
quote: "The surprise worked out, which is great because I wasn't 100% confident that it would. I reserved out a theatre for us to watch a Christmas movie."
quote: "She's beaming. She's happy. This is what I was going for. Some guys think of girls as objects and use them for the sex. I can't start anything unless I find a girl intriguing. Because of being treated like a slut, her vulnerability was hardened into cynicism and a tough as nails attitude. In this moment she was vulnerable again which meant every mistake a man had made with her melted away and that is exactly what I wanted."
quote: "Christmas comedies are usually about 90-minutes but for some reason they made this one 150—a bit too long. It was a good movie but the sexual tension in the air was much more entertaining. Anytime the movie took a dip my eyes wandered. When the credits rolled our eyes locked."
quote: "\"I don't know what it is about you but I feel so special,\" she said as we continued to get closer."
quote: "\"It might have something to do with the dancing and the theatre but we can pretend it's an unknown variable. It makes me seem mysterious anyway, which I like.\""
quote: "\"Hmm...I'm pretty sure my buddy is doing paper work so we could give into our animalistic temptations Adam and Eve style.\""
quote: "We kissed, which quickly turned into making out. There's only one direction to go in after that—sexy time. This sex was different from any other I had before. With the threesome, it was raw. With Mia it was love making. With Carly it was somewhere in the middle—animalistic with some TLC. I always wondered how sex would work in a movie theatre with those damn armrests that won't go up. Turns out, it works just fine and I highly recommend it."
quote: "Then, of course, it happened—another sexual disaster—latex, a half chub and now—while she's on top of me she lifts a little too high and comes down a little too hard."
quote: "Have you ever heard a penis pop? I wish I could say I haven't. It's pretty much an instant end to a great moment. She can't stop apologizing and I do my best to cover up the pain and discomfort but Jesus F. Christ that shit hurt."
quote: "\"It's okay. It'll be fine.\" I can barely get the words out."
quote: "I take a breath and get my composure, \"No I'm good.\" I wince in my mind and do my best to cover up my external noises. \"Besides my buddy will be in here at any minute and I don't know if he would ever be able to get over the sight of my beautiful penis.\""
quote: "We both chuckle a bit and that lightens the mood. The awkwardness is gone—for now."
quote: "It was a very painful ride to her house. I gave her a kiss and she was off into the snowy night. As soon as she had cleared the car and entered her house, I screamed out in pain."
quote: "Moments later a text comes in—I was so close. Next time. Thanks for treating me like a queen."
quote: "JUST WHEN LIFE GETS GOOD, watch out. I don't know if everyone experiences this but it's pretty much how my life has played out since I can remember. I had a great date with Carly, my family seemed to be getting along on this Eve of Christmas 2010, and overall, the trip home is a successful one. That is, until the call from Mia."
quote: "What's that they say? You can't always get what you want? Well sometimes you do. Turns out, that's not always a good thing."
quote: "\"I realized that I want you and not him. He was a poor man's Jason.\""
quote: "What the fuck? I could feel my perfect little plan blowing up in my face."
quote: "\"So the rollercoaster ride continues? We're together. We're apart. I want you; you don't want me. You want me and now I have to what?\""
quote: "\"Is it because of this Carly girl I keep hearing about?\""
quote: "\"Her. Her kid. Me. You broke my heart under that mistletoe after months of trying to get you back. Carly was there to pick up the pieces. There were a lot of fucking pieces Mia. I don't know how you want me to respond.\""
quote: "\"I've got this whole Christmas thing with my family. Wanna talk later tonight? Maybe we'll meet up?\""
quote: "\"Okay. That I can do but I gotta say this before hand. This is fucked up Angel.\""
quote: "\"I know, but I'm confident we'll figure it all out.\""
quote: "Hanging up the phone I realize what I have done—double booked myself. On one side, I have the girl that invades my dreams who left me standing at the proverbial alter. On the other, a sexy woman who let her guard down, and who I actively chased. Someone is going to get hurt here. Pain is quickly becoming the theme of this trip, if not, this life."
quote: "After dinner with the fam, some ridiculous pictures and a bit of back patting, I was off to see Carly and Travis. When I arrived, they were playing some video games. The warm and fuzzies of the holiday season actually tricked my brain into believing this was a scene that could get into."
quote: "Travis and I exchange stories and knowledge—my stories of experience and his, knowledge of that which I spoke. Like every kid it takes little time for him to get distracted and he was off to his friend's place to compare new Transformers—which, by the way, are far more kick ass than my 90's Optimums Prime."
quote: "The kid exits and about thirty-seconds later Carly walked around the corner naked. Even my injured penis knew it was time to leap into action. Man, what a body. Carly had more curves than a roundabout and that attitude just made her even hotter. I'm seduced by her tanned skin and intoxicating dance. I was putty in her feminine hands. She unzipped and gave me the best blowjob since the first girl that looked at a penis and said; maybe I'll try this. I mean, to put this into some sort of perspective, we're talking a winning gold at the Olympics kind of achievement. Gotta love the twenty-first-century experienced woman. After a little bit of oral—of which I was both the receiver and the giver—we got to the really good stuff. Talk about your intense sexual tirade. No broken penises, latex, or mirrors within 100 yards. We lay on the floor breathing heavily after both of us had achieved the fabled orgasm when my phone dinged."
quote: "I told Carly I had to go see my brother and that I'd call her later. I felt dirty as I hastily ran out the door. I'm not built like other guys. I don't do this kind of stuff. Why was I doing it? I couldn't even answer that. I was on autopilot—stuck between a rock and a hard place."
quote: "When I did meet up with Mia, it was a whole different kind of feeling—intense but in a different way. Love was in the air. We talked about the situation and it quickly became clear to her that there would be no resolve on this night. She simply wanted to remind me of the intense physical connection we had before I left."
quote: "Right now, anyone would think I'm a pig, hell even I do—sleeping with both of these lovely ladies in the same night. The problem is, no matter how good my intentions, I am easily seduced. A random girl couldn't walk up to me and get this reaction but I'd known both for quite some time and there was a real connection to both. I just lose all objectivity when breasts are involved."
quote: "It's not fair to either that I'm sleeping with both in the same night but I'm able to justify it in my head as Carly was on Christmas Eve and since it was just after one in the morning, Mia was on Christmas Day. Weak justification, I know, but I need something to hold on to. I felt like a complete dick. I had wronged these two women that both cared about me. I knew that the hammer was going to come down on me but their reaction wasn't the only worry on my mind. I always said I wouldn't drink a lot, smoke weed, be a womanizer, allow myself to do the things every man does—and wouldn't you know it, I had become a stereotype. My psyche would not be okay with this."
quote: "Worst still, on top of my objectionable behavior, was that both had asked me to spend New Year's Eve with them. Carly won by default because she brought it up first. This would not be an easy conversation to have with Mia."
quote: "\"What does she have that I don't?\" Cliché but just as monumental as the last woman who said it to the last guy stating his case."
quote: "\"It's not that she has qualities that you don't. This is just a hard situation...and she has a kid.\""
quote: "\"So you're going to what, stay with her for her kid? We both know that's not you. That's guilt.\""
quote: "\"And you hurt me. You turned me down repeatedly. Maybe you just want what you can't have.\""
quote: "That's when Mia's tears started and didn't stop for days. It was, an asshole thing to say, but how long could that conversation possibly have continued before one of us got angry?"
quote: "Carly and I hit a New Year's Eve party at an upscale hotel but the emotion was gone. Mia's constant phone calls and texts were draining me. Worst still, all I could think of was Mia's smile and the moments when we were truly happy. I knew that I wasn't fooling anyone, including Carly, but I tried to get through the night without incident."
quote: "The kiss at midnight was cool—and cool is not a word you want to use to describe a kiss. Passionate, amazing, life altering; yes. Cool; no. The plan was to get through the night, go back to Miami and whoever followed would be the winner. It was weak resolve but I honestly had no idea what to do. I wished I was built like other men that would have loved to have these two hellcats fighting over them but in the end, I just felt like a class a, blue ribbon asshole."
quote: "The elevator ride from the top to the ground floor seemed to last forever. There were four other couples going down. I would be the only one to hit rock bottom."
quote: "\"What's wrong with you?\" Carly asked, demanding an answer."
quote: "\"Me? Nothing.\" Saying this was a big mistake as she saw right through my hapless attempt to cover up my broken emotions."
quote: "\"You're just not into this at all, are you?\""
quote: "\"How can you say that? Look at everything we've done together over the past week. Look at all of the conversations we've had—how I've dealt with Trav...\""
quote: "I stopped myself, but not soon enough. The other couples hold their silence awkwardly."
quote: "\"Fuck you. You...you...fuck.\" She pushes me into the wall, shaking the elevator. Secretly I was hoping for it to fall and kill me but it was much stronger than the one in Rodney's studio. \"I told you I hate when guys use Travis as an excuse to stay with me.\""
quote: "\"Yes it is. Fuck. You run around saying you're so honest. You're always up front but you can't even admit this small thing to me.\" Never try to trick a woman about anything to do with her kid. It's a fool's errand."
quote: "\"Fine. Look there's a lot going on in my head right now and while I was into this in the beginning that stuff is getting in the way and no, I don't want to hurt Travis.\""
quote: "A small tear runs down her face. \"You told me you were different. You showed me you were different. But you're not. You're just a player. A dick. You use women.\""
quote: "\"That's not what this is. I genuinely have feelings for you but life is crushing those feelings.\""
quote: "\"Crushing? How's this for crushing?\" Carly moves like a cat and throws one hell of a penis punch. The sensation goes right through my body. She then proceeds to take off her shoe and smack me in the face with the heel, cutting my cheek and opening up that old contact bottle wound from back in the day. The pain is overwhelming."
quote: "\"That was...that...damn...that was a pretty good example of crushing, woman.\" I say as I drop to my knees."
quote: "\"You know Jason, not everything is a fucking joke. There are moments in life when you have to get serious or get the fuck out. Stop wasting the world's time with your bullshit and misdirection. FUCK!\""
quote: "Carly and the others exit the elevator and she leaves me lying there. One of the guys that took the ride down with us was about to help me up but his woman gives him a push. \"Sorry broseph,\" he says, as he exits."
quote: "Carly shouts out one final suggestion before leaving. \"Go back to Miami and don't come back. You're an asshole.\""
quote: "\"Thank you for shouting that out for everyone to hear,\" I shout, which, if you think about it is quite ironic."
quote: "Hours go by before I actually get up off the floor in the lobby. I had to pay one of the security guards to let me crawl up into the corner by a plant and drink a two-six of vodka. All I wanted was to do right by these two girls. What happened to the plan? Come here and if Mia's still interested, I get back together with her. If not, I try with Carly. Where the fuck did this plan get so screwy?"
quote: "I arrived at my mom's house at around four in the morning and crashed on the couch. I wanted nothing to do with the world. It's a good thing I popped all of these Tylenols before I left the hotel. That security guard was a great drug dealer but $12 a pill—that seemed a bit inflated. Nonetheless, thank God for the pills, because I passed out easily, retreating into my dream world."
quote: "That voice, unmistakable and clearly angry was the first sound I heard as I checked back into the real world. Mom was not a happy camper on New Year's Day."
quote: "\"She's such a sweet girl and she's in love with you. But yet you're going out with this sk...what happened to your face?\""
quote: "\"The skank—I believe you were about to call her—took offense to my complicated love life and hit me with her shoe.\""
quote: "\"With her shoe? Well kid you shouldn't be playing these games.\""
quote: "\"I'm not playing games. I honestly like both of them. I had a plan and it just didn't work out the way I had envisioned in my head, once again.\""
quote: "My mom continued to talk and tell me everything that I was doing wrong which, she says started with pursuing two girls at once."
quote: "\"You should have never asked out Carly before leaving Miami if you wanted to try with Mia again. What's wrong with you?\""
quote: "\"I don't know, mother. Your son is a colossal, epic and impossibly flawed fuck up.\""
quote: "\"Stop feeling sorry for yourself. You don't have time for that. Your flight is in a few hours. If you hurry up, I'll drive you.\""
quote: "It took me 3 hours to get all checked in and on the plane—destination Miami. I broke two hearts. My mom was disappointed in me. An innocent kid was hurt and I looked like I got in a fight with the Last Samurai. I had but one thought in my head."
quote: "Yes, life was good. It was ordinary but good. No screaming fans, screaming girls or parents looking at me with extreme disapproval because of my romantic choices. The goal was simplicity."
quote: "I was working out a lot now and today's run would be the first in which I cracked the ten-mile mark. I threw on my non-blue suede shoes, a new but already well-worn hoodie and headed down the stairs from my condo. I had the latest Chuck and Josh podcast blaring in my ears, which were covered by Beats headphones. The noise cancellation kept the world out of my head while I ran."
quote: "I made it about six steps when I was stopped in my tracks—for standing in front of me was Mia, bag in tow. She was skinnier, and that's saying something. She immediately started to tear up and all of a sudden, that simple little world I was working on went poof."
quote: "I shot down the stairs at near the speed of light and grabbed her up into my arms. The hug might have been too tight but in a moment like this—there is no noticing pain. I'm not sure if it was the month of simplistic clarity or the sight of those big blue eyes but I knew what was coming next."
quote: "\"I missed you and couldn't stay away,\" she said while fighting back the tears."
quote: "I, slightly more composed, felt the same way, \"We've both been stupid, stupid animals.\""
quote: "She stared at me, right into me. \"Looks like taking the chance to come here was smart.\""
quote: "\"Well relying on me to be the smart one wouldn't have made any sense.\""
quote: "\"You're the smartest guy I know—just not at this kind of stuff.\""
quote: "\"I'm a work in progress. Know any good artists that can finish painting my picture as a good and decent but yet fantastically flawed man with the best intentions and worst results?\""
quote: "\"Well that was a mouth full,\" she said while smiling ear to ear. \"And yes, I just so happen to be such an artist.\""
quote: "\"Groovy. That's right—I'm kickin' it old school.\""
quote: "It's amazing how five-minutes made Carly, Mia's dude, that painful mistletoe moment, New Year's Eve—all of it—disappear. Without the weight of hurting Carly and Travis, the decision to take the love of my life back seemed easy."
quote: "\"One thing I think we should agree on right here is that we leave the past in the past. I don't need to hear about what you were into and you don't need to hear about what I've been doing.\""
quote: "I knew what that meant. I wouldn't like what my angel was doing in hell. Nevertheless, I'm no hypocrite. Nothing pisses me off more than when a man fucks multiple women and then when his girl does the same—gets mad at her. Let's face it, I was no angel, and with that statement of declaration, I'm guessing her wings were clipped for a bit too. None of that mattered though. All I wanted to do was rediscover that fantastic body of hers."
quote: "Mia came with a full arsenal of seduction. She was ready for anything—including a late night hot tub session complete with wine, strawberries, whipped cream and a new bikini that would make porn stars blush."
quote: "\"You look like a million dollars with killer tah-tah's.\" I said, as if she didn't already know. One of the things that really turned me on about Mia was that she wasn't one of those self-loathing but at the same time self-absorbed skinny chicks who pretended she thought she was fat to get attention. I fucking hate those a-whores."
quote: "\"Well two weeks of not eating and making myself sick over my decisions will do that.\""
quote: "\"Oh ya. It was that bad. I knew the mistake I made that night under the mistletoe as soon as I made it. I know you better than anyone does. You're emotional and extreme. You love so wholly but when you're mad, it's like a hurricane.\""
quote: "\"Hell hath no fury like this man scorned I guess. But I think I did more internal damage than worldly, epic war shit.\""
quote: "\"Well, how about you do some damage right now?\" She asked, seductively, while removing her bikini top."
quote: "Having sex by the hot tub felt like our first time. It was as if we were re-discovering each other's bodies. Every curve I touched made the hairs stand up on the back of my neck. She looked at me in such a way that made me weak. We were never into marathon sex. It was always about getting to the big O at the same time, which is probably good in a public place. Forty-five minutes of sex is hard to cover up outside in the open."
quote: "I grabbed her by the waist and threw her on top of me—wrapped my arms around her tight and pulled her close, thrusting as deep as I could. She was there. I was there. It was always like a countdown to her orgasm. At ten, her lip would quiver. Nine, eight, seven—she could barely breathe and her eyes would shut tight. Six, five, four, three—her knees tighten into my side. Two—her body quivers. One—her body shakes; she bites my lip and then the release."
quote: "Her body slumps with pleasure. She manages to find just enough energy to hold herself up, look me dead in the eyes and together we say, \"I love you,\" just like that night in the hotel. This was one of those nights I would remember forever, even if I got Alzheimer's later in life."
quote: "The next two weeks were like a dream. Back in my favorite city we ate at all the restaurants we didn't get the chance to check out the first time around, visited some acquaintances I had made while she was living back in Winnipeg, went for runs—I hate to sound repetitious but it was perfect."
quote: "On what was to be our last night in Miami—a point of which we were not yet aware—we had the single best night of our lives. We made love three times before supper—once in bed, once in the kitchen and once in the shower. Then we took a ride to the boardwalk to enjoy seafood at what we felt was the best restaurant in the city. While eating we didn't stop holding hands and kissing. It was the sweetest dinner of my life. I was down right gushing even if it wasn't the manly thing to do."
quote: "After dinner, we went up an elevator to a club high in the sky where we danced and drank the night away. With the unseasonably warm air, we were able to enjoy the patio as we partied with two other couples that had connecting booths. It was clear we were the happiest even though the other couples were in bliss as well. The guys kept telling me how lucky I was and the women kept telling Mia that what we had looked perfect."
quote: "That last slow dance on top of Miami was spectacular. Mia—being 5'3—was a bit short so she often stepped onto my feet and I led the dance."
quote: "Have you ever had a moment that actually felt flawless? With nothing but the sky above our heads, Miami below, our song playing and a nice warm breeze—this was ours. In fact I had a bit of a daydream while dancing. In one year's time, I would return with Mia to this spot, with this song and propose to her."
quote: "It's just too bad reality had to drop kick fantasy off the patio. Reality is an attention craving lunatic."
quote: "My phone rings. Mia grabs it from my pocket to see \"Dad\". On a night when we agreed to not check our phones, she handed it to me. Parents were always the exception to the rule."
quote: "He choked on his words a bit and had a hard time even speaking. My heart sunk into my stomach because my dad is a strong man whom never showing weakness. He once took a nail to the head and finished the shed he was building before even sitting down. He was a solider—not literally, but a solider of life, always composed—but not today. \"It's time to come home. Your mother is sick.\""
quote: "I just looked at Mia as that perfect moment turned into incredulous fear. He need not say anymore. With those few words and only a few hours of flight we headed back to Winnipeg—headed back to disaster and a certain repeat of historical bullshit."
quote: "MY PARENTS WERE DIVORCED but it wasn't a traumatic experience as a child. It was a tumultuous experience for an adult. I often saw kids in school and they usually acted a fool because of their parent's divorce. Teachers forgave most of their shenanigans because they were kids and it was sad."
quote: "When my parents split, I was eighteen. Acting out would have been immature and had it been a simple we don't love each other anymore it may have been much easier on me. My brother, who was fifteen, got to play mom and dad against each other in the quest for new cell phones and money for trips."
quote: "I was in Ottawa when I got the call from my mom. \"I'm leaving your father.\" She said. I wasn't even sure it was my mom on the other end of the phone. She was so cold. \"I can't stay anymore.\""
quote: "\"Just tell me there's no one else.\" I replied. The split would be bad enough but add some fucking jerk off into the equation and Armageddon would be upon us."
quote: "Ottawa to Winnipeg is about 2,000 kilometers—twenty-six hours apart. I drove from Canada's capital to the Prairies in less than sixteen hours. There would be no way this was going to happen without me there to take care of the family. I spoke to my dad as soon as I arrived back in Winnipeg. He had no idea a split was coming. In fact, he was talking about a trip with my mom. That left me to find my mother. Where was she? What was she doing?"
quote: "I called her about fifteen times before she answered. We arranged to meet for some dinner at The Forks; Winnipeg's version of Central Park. Within minutes of getting to the restaurant, I was standing in front of her and a guy named Calvin."
quote: "This woman—that looked like my mother but was not acting like the Julie Mytez that loved so completely—was on a mission. She was going to leave my dad for this giant bag of douche, and she was going to do it soon."
quote: "I had met this suave pharmaceuticals salesman many years before, with my mom. I was probably thirteen or fourteen at the time. Even then, I knew something was strange about the way he and my mother interacted but being the late bloomer, didn't understand what I was observing."
quote: "\"I like your mother a lot,\" was the first thing this cocksucker said to me. What a dick. What a fucking asshole. I wanted to punch him in his already fat lips. He looked kind of like a Japanese fighting fish, which is weird because he wasn't Japanese at all. I hated his face."
quote: "I sat at the table and listened as my mom justified her actions and assured me that she was still being faithful to my father. Then after the lunch, she left with Calvin to his hotel room. I think I should have asked my mom for her definition of faithful."
quote: "The next day my mom told my dad she was leaving. Again, acting unlike herself she had complete disregard for everyone. I love my mom and respect her but I'd have to say this was a bitch move."
quote: "Two weeks of fighting ensued. My brother saw his opening and started acting like an idiot. My dad was questioning everything, which left me feeling as if I was on twenty-four hour suicide watch. I was sure to have some long lasting effects from the disregard for the sanctity of marriage. Then my mother buckled under the weight of her decisions—landing herself in the hospital."
quote: "My mom's doctor had said someone should be at home with her for the next two weeks. He went on to strongly suggest someone be with her twenty-four hours a day. My dad, angry and realizing the financial impact of my mom's decisions, had to work. I would have stayed but I was far too emotionally unavailable for such a task. My brother was also exceptionally unavailable. So, the question had to be asked—who could stay with mom?"
quote: "\"Calvin is going to stay with me and your dad.\" My mom said this with a straight face from her hospital bed, probably thinking I would be lenient given her current medical situation. Fuck that!"
quote: "\"So let me get this straight,\" she tried to cut in but I wasn't having it. \"To recap—you want your lover to move in with you and dad so he can take care of you while not telling dad about the fact that this asshole is the reason you guys aren't together. And what, you expect me to not say a word?\""
quote: "\"He's not the reason your father and I aren't together. We've had issues for a long time. He isn't exactly Mr. Perfect you know.\""
quote: "\"Semantics mother. No man is Mr. Perfect. You're with Calvin and you want him to move in with dad. You're fucked. How the fuck did you get to this point? You tell dad, or I will. Calvin moves in and I'm going to beat the living shit out of that old prick with a frying pan.\""
quote: "I stormed out of the hospital—pissed, angrier than I have ever been and I couldn't find an outlet. I was driving and screaming at no one, punching the steering wheel. I was seeing red. The weight of my mother's decisions had now not only brought her crumbling down, but me as well."
quote: "I called my dad, told him everything and so started the long road to hell for my family—paved by plenty of good intentions."
quote: "Now, with a story like that you would expect my father to want nothing to do with my mother, however, when Mia and I got back from Miami he was by her side. Calvin was out of the picture just a few months after their affair. Having stole thousands from my mother; \"someone\" got his ass deported back to the US. Even so, the pain of such a messy break up was still there. In moments like this, you realize someone's true spirit. My father's was good."
quote: "My mother had multiple issues diagnosed—breast cancer, depression and her ankles—which she had many problems with—were giving out. \"They\" say your state of mind is all the medicine or inhibiter you need. With my mom's current state of mind, she let everything come crumbling down at once."
quote: "Months went by and we helped my mom as best we could. Cancer is a constant battle but with family around her, my mom was doing pretty well. Unfortunately, while I was taking care of my mom I let everything else go to shit. I don't know if there was some latent guilt about the way I handled the divorce years earlier or if leaving her alone while I moved to Miami was weighing on my mind, but I spent every waking second taking care of her. My podcast fell off the charts as I wasn't making any new episodes, and even when I did, my fans were sick of my lack of consistency. The recession made things almost impossible as well. Advertisers just weren't spending the money they were, six months prior. The gravy train came to a sudden halt, just as Mia feared."
quote: "Couple that with Mia's family dynamic and the only time we actually spent together was when we forced the world to stop fucking with us. Those moments were rare though. She had three family members die in the span of just two months and her parents were broke off their asses."
quote: "Mia and I were so busy trying to keep our heads above water and balance our family commitments—that Miami couple were no where to be found. Ending each night with lovemaking turned into ending each night in different sections of the house. A bountiful bank account turned into overdraft. That smile of hers that melted me was always upside down. Winnipeg was once again killing us. Just when we'd pick up steam with a sweet date or an endearing moment, something would knock us down again."
quote: "We still loved each other and were in it for the long haul but life sometimes just won't give a man a break. I woke up on a beautiful fall morning with an overwhelmingly great feeling. As my eyes opened, the warm sun was cutting through a crack in the drapes and warming my cheek. My mom was finally in remission and that news alone, a night earlier, was enough to allow me to get my first good night sleep in months."
quote: "I rolled over to see Mia sleeping peacefully. She was so flawless and beautiful in her sleep—until she snored. I woke her up with a kiss. As she opened her eyes, she smiled and went for one of those big, satisfying stretches."
quote: "\"You look so happy,\" she said to me under her breath while letting out a little squeal. \"Boy did that feel good,\" referring to the stretch."
quote: "\"I'm feeling good. I slept through the night and for the first time in forever I don't have to jump out of bed and run around all over the city.\""
quote: "\"So what you're saying is, that we have a bit of time this morning.\""
quote: "I knew where this was going and I was all for it. \"Fuck yes, angel. Tons of time—enough time for an old school three-peat,\" I said as I kissed down her neck, in between her breasts and licked down her stomach to hide my head under the sheets."
quote: "If a woman doesn't know what the three-peat is, she hasn't quite lived. If a man doesn't know the power of three he needs to check himself, before he wrecks himself. The three-peat is a triple orgasm for the woman—mouth, fingers, and penis. Unless you're a porn star, as a dude you don't last forever. I guess there are the exceptions to every rule but few dudes can pound and get their girl off before his toes start curling."
quote: "With the three-peat the guy has a fighting chance while making it almost impossible for a girl to get out of bed after—weak knees. It's common knowledge that oral, fingering and intercourse all hit different areas in different ways. Oral is warm, wet all about the clit. Fingering adds a bit of a hook with a different motion, which always gets that g-spot to swell. Intercourse is all about size and filling her up to the point of screaming—result, orgasms numbering three."
quote: "It can be a bit tiring but think about when you go to a gas station. If the person working, just pumps your gas for you, it's the regular old experience. However, if that same person washes your windows, checks your oil, and then pumps your gas—you leave feeling as if you got some special treatment. If you can visualize the metaphor—you're on the right track."
quote: "When I left the house at around two in the afternoon, it felt like it was going to be a great day—well rested, well sexed, well done. I felt like the men in those cheesy Viagra ads. I even caught myself whistling."
quote: "My first stop of the day was at the mall nearby, to pick up some makeup for Mia and a few new dress shirts for me. I wanted to feel ultra-fresh for the job hunting I was about to take on."
quote: "Standing in the store looking at shirts, I heard a familiar voice. \"Yeah, go try it on baby.\" I turned around to see Ronald standing near the dressing rooms. He caught a glimpse of me out of the corner of his eye. \"Jason Mytez.\""
quote: "He was holding a few female articles of clothing and had a bit of a different swagger to him. When I first met him, he seemed self-conscious and unsure of himself. Now he seemed almost cocky. \"Picking up lacy underwear to surprise your boyfriend?\""
quote: "He lets out a fake chuckle. \"That's what I always liked about you Jason. That's what everyone likes about big man Mytez—you always have some hilarious comment that breaks the ice.\""
quote: "\"Settle down, Ron. Don't get all wet with excitement. I was joking,\" I said as I started to walk away."
quote: "I stopped and weighed the possibilities. What were the chances that he meant, thee Carly?"
quote: "\"That's right, homie. You're thinking of the right one.\""
quote: "I turned around to see this cocky grin on his ugly fucking face. Behind him, Carly came out of a change room, unaware of what she was walking into. She looked up and saw yours truly standing there. \"Jason?\" She stammered a bit before offering her own witty contribution to a conversation that was surely going south for yours truly. \"Where did you get that scar on your face?\""
quote: "She was of course, referring to the scar from when she all but stabbed me with the heel of her shoe. \"I got my just desserts from a fiery little blonde. It's cool though. No reason to act concerned. Chicks dig guys with scars. Didn't you know?\""
quote: "Ron stood there, cocky, holding Carly from behind. He was trying to get a reaction out of me but I didn't much care. I had Mia now, my angel. As I went to walk away again, Carly decided to not let me get the last word. \"So is it true?\""
quote: "\"Did you really sleep with Mia on the same night that you slept with me?\""
quote: "Fuck. Fuck. Fuck. My heart sunk into my stomach. The biggest mistake of my life was coming back to haunt me. I tried to cover up my mistake. \"I don't know what you're talking about.\""
quote: "\"Oh you know exactly what she's talking about.\" Ron said sternly, as he got closer to me. \"The night that Mia broke up with me, she slept with you. Right after, you slept with her,\" pointing at Carly—he knew he had the win here."
quote: "\"And then you slept with her after I slept with Mia and the whole thing is a bit disgusting but I really don't think it's worthy of conversation.\""
quote: "\"Well if you don't want to talk about it—maybe Mia will.\""
quote: "Now I'm up in Ron's face. \"You really want to bring the past into the present, Ron? Are you sure you wanna go down that road, Mc Dick?\""
quote: "\"You know what brought Carly and me together? Our mutual hatred for you.\""
quote: "Carly chimes back in. \"Yeah, and what would be the best kind of revenge? Costing you, your precious little angel.\""
quote: "\"I was gonna leave it alone but seeing you really brings all that hatred back to the surface.\" Ron and I are now staring each other down. The store feels smaller as my anger begins to take over then Ron whispers, \"Maybe after I tell Mia, I'll defile your angel again.\""
quote: "Without a thought, I grab him by the collar and toss Ron clear across the back-end of the store, right into a change room. As he hit the door, it popped off the hinges and the mirror cracked."
quote: "Carly shouted something at me but I didn't really hear her. Having seen the tension earlier, some staff called security and they had arrived on the scene."
quote: "Ron yells from the floor of the change room, \"You better go tell her now, asshole, because my next stop is to see Mia.\""
quote: "I try to break free from security and go after him again but they had a firm hold on me. Carly's screaming, everyone's looking at me as if I'm a fucking criminal and security are threatening to call the cops."
quote: "I turn around and walk out of the store on my own steam, leaving security to follow behind. When I get outside, I can feel my heart pounding in my chest. The sun seems so bright."
quote: "About half an hour later, I arrive at Mia's work. I decide it is best to tell her, in my own words, about that night on Christmas Eve. I've rehearsed what I want to say. I'll tell her we said to keep the past in the past but this was going to come up. I'll tell her that it really hurt when she started dating Ron. I'll tell her...nothing."
quote: "When I got inside the lounge, Ron was holding her in his arms while she cried."
quote: "Mia spots me out of the corner of her eye. She looks at me with such disappointment. Without saying a word she runs away."
quote: "I look at Ron for a moment, taking into account all of the bones I'm going to break. \"Game on, mother fucker.\""
quote: "I run at him and spear his spine right into the bar top. We both go tumbling to the ground as straws, cherries and limes fly everywhere. People in the lounge are trying to move quickly out of the way."
quote: "I start wailing on Ron's face when a couple of staff members try to pull me off him. One of them yells at me, \"Jason! Stop it!\" Ron gets the opening he needs and kicks me in the face. As we all tussle, chairs and tables with people's meals come crashing to the floor."
quote: "Irate, I break free and grab onto Ron. With speed and my full weight behind me, I slam our bodies into a giant window. I feel a bit of resistance but then the glass gives way and we both tumble through the millions of little pieces to the patio floor."
quote: "He's on his back and I have my left knee in his chest. I'm about to start wailing on him again when I hear Mia, \"STOP IT!\""
quote: "She has tears streaming down her face and her body is shaking. I get off Ron and try to talk to her but she's not having it. She keeps pulling away from me. Nothing I'm saying is getting through."
quote: "\"You did it, didn't you?\" She questions me with an anger I had never heard from her before."
quote: "\"It's not that simple. You were there. You know how comp...\""
quote: "She doesn't let me finish. \"Just answer the fucking question, Jason.\""
quote: "I cannot lie to my angel. I nod in agreement and then something snaps in her."
quote: "Mia winds up and slaps me in the face, then another to the opposite side. She starts to push me, screaming. She wants me out of her life for good and that's exactly what she gets. I leave in a cop car and she cuts me off cold turkey."
quote: "I woke up on this day, thinking that it would be great. Turns out—not so much."
quote: "THE CHARGES AGAINST ME WERE DROPPED. Carly and Ron had gotten the revenge they were looking for and the twenty-first-century experienced woman was satisfied. It turns out that Ronald's vendetta against me almost cost him his relationship as well. Carly saw how much satisfaction he got from helping Mia so she told him not to speak to my angel again."
quote: "I convinced the owner of the restaurant to drop his charges in lieu of payment for the damages plus some interest and too many favors for me to count. I dodged yet another violent bullet."
quote: "Mia would not return any of my calls and finally after blowing up her phone, her dad paid me a visit. I respected this man standing in front of me, threatening my very existence so I would stop the calls and send for my stuff while crashing on Kristian's couch."
quote: "My dissent into darkness was almost complete but there was one big piece missing. With no angel, no home, no money and no prospects, I made the decision to get back into the club business. Kristian was working on the restaurant side of a large corporation that owned several nightclubs and lounges in town. He had told his boss that I was looking for work and they were more than happy to bring me on board, despite not having been actively involved in the business for quite awhile."
quote: "Right from the start, I was back in business mode. I quickly made a few changes that were long overdue within the company and within two weeks, I was the talk of the town again."
quote: "I was relentless in my pursuit of success. The sound of bass drowned out the sound of Mia's voice screaming at me. The feeling of power dampened the memory of being powerless to stop Ronald. I decided—though, not consciously—to drown my sorrows in a sea of alcohol, power, and pussy."
quote: "On a night where I had a glass of JD in my hand and I just finished making some power moves, all I was missing was the pussy. I scanned the club looking for a girl to take my frustrations out on—in the nicest way possible of course. The first girl that caught my eye was a short Russian girl with bountiful breasts—Dominique."
quote: "I didn't care that we were co-workers and that she may have seen this as an abuse of my power—a concern that I always had up until this point. I hated those guys in the clubs that used their position to get chicks into bed and I honestly wasn't doing that here. However, I simply didn't give a shit. If that's what she thought I was doing, so be it. She was a fling, a rebound—her opinion did not matter."
quote: "The world would feel my vengeance. I was angry. No one understood my justification for what happened with Mia and Carly. Frankly, it was getting to the point where I didn't really understand either. Self-loathing took over and I decided that Dominique would be mine, for the night."
quote: "This girl was hot and very sexual. It didn't take long before we were tearing away at each other's clothes. I probably could have even gone without the fifty-five bucks that it cost for a late night dinner but I was still trying to pretend I was Mia's gentleman."
quote: "I ravaged Dominique until the early morning. She was down for whatever and that's exactly what she got. Once the performance was done, I rolled over, pretending to fall asleep. This allowed her to exit without any awkward conversation."
quote: "Turns out Mia moved on pretty quickly as well. I met Mia's fling a few times in the club. For whatever reason, he always wanted to talk my ear off. It made me want to puke all over his perfectly landscaped hair. If I had to compare him to somebody, imagine Uncle Jesse from Full House without the cool. He cared about his hair and worked out when he probably should have been reading a book or playing Brain Age—anything to get his brain cells active again."
quote: "I get how it can seem completely stereotypical for me to hate the guy that was screwing my angel but he actually, really, authentically sucked. I don't get guys like him. He was ripped, but the roids were going to affect him down the road. Didn't men think of these things? He'd eventually end up an old man with flab from the muscle that his frame could not possibly handle, balls the size of peas and very little to show for his life."
quote: "As if being boned by Uncle Jesse wasn't shitty enough, she apparently moved on to the club that I was in direct competition with—tearing through three guys on the staff. There were rumors of drugs, hard partying, and gangbangs. Today, I can say I don't believe the rumors but when you're in the midst of becoming a head case due to losing your ladylove, rumors muster in your mind and you can't help but believe them."
quote: "Women think we believe all of this shit because we want to paint the ex-girlfriend as a she-devil but that couldn't be further from the truth. We do it because when we hear these things we picture a decline in our lady's self-respect. We know guys will take advantage of that state of mind and we truly don't want to see our girls hurt. Believing the rumors allows us to no longer picture our girl as our girl and then all of the possible things that she could be doing with other dudes, doesn't matter. I know—it's messed, but then again, we've got a mess upstairs in our heads on the best of days so why would any woman expect anything less on our worst?"
quote: "These rumors are probably what fueled the events that took place next. For you see, after Dominique I felt like a dirty whore. Picture Jim Carrey in Ace Ventura after he realized he kissed that dude. I wanted to live in the shower and wash my skin with an iron. That was, of course before I decided retaliation was in order. If she was getting rear ended on the freeway of flings then I was ready to start whitening some teeth. Now that the rumors suggested she was ahead of the game, much like in my late bloomer stage—I was going to make up for lost time."
quote: "The second slutty interlude, post-Mia was Cynthia—a sassy, dark bartender from one of my clubs. She was on fire. Everyone wanted a piece and I got her with very little effort, which led me to believe she wasn't as pure as the driven snow—a contention that was offered by none other than Miss Cynthia herself. I banged her against my fridge."
quote: "Next up to bat was Wendy—one of Mia's friends. I actually introduced them so she was my friend first. We had some cute moments and there was a bit more effort with her but again it was easy to get to the promise land. I slammed her in my truck."
quote: "The sex with Wendy was good because she was a friend of Mia's. It really got me going so Chi—Mia's best friend—was next. This bi-sexual bedroom bouncer was a dynamo in the sack. We fucked all over Winnipeg. If you've ever wondered whether or not that bunny hop position from porn works—I'm here to tell you, it does."
quote: "Chi actually lasted for a bit until one night, a couple of clubbers named Emma and Courtney cornered me after work. These two wanted it bad. Unfortunately, there were no condoms in the immediate vicinity. That's okay—a dual blowjob on my desk was pleasure enough."
quote: "At this point, I thought I was going to calm down. Even though I was enjoying myself, the pain was only suppressed for a few brief hours. This was the problem—no booze could take away the pain, no marijuana, and no coke—none of it. The only thing that helped was the sex and when I tried to stop the pain rushed over me."
quote: "Without sex, I was calling Mia again, writing her little notes and crying like a 3 year old that had his toy taken away. I felt like I had to pick—the sex or the sadness. The COO of the company that owned all of the clubs I now ran came to me and urged me to stop my self-destructive path."
quote: "\"This is no good Jason,\" he said as we sat in a lounge."
quote: "\"Not to sound ungrateful or anything, but nothing I'm doing has hurt business...\""
quote: "He cuts me off, \"Yet.\" Point goes to the COO. \"The alcohol, the women, the rumors of drug use. It won't take too long until the board votes you out. They need to have confidence in you.\""
quote: "\"If the board votes me out based on rumors, they're children.\""
quote: "\"No, they're business men and if you weren't half drunk right now, you'd see that. Even though you've been promoted to the top you can still fall. Look, I brought you in. Straighten up or not even I'll be able to save you.\""
quote: "His advice actually stopped me from the philandering for a couple of weeks. I decided that I would spend more time at the office than in the clubs in an effort to lessen the temptation."
quote: "Dominique made another appearance in my life for a few days though. She had moved up in the club business to work in the same office as me as an assistant—my assistant. Given that I was depressed off my ass about Mia, she was now in the power position."
quote: "\"How about a quickie on the desk?\" She asked in the first thirty-seconds we were alone."
quote: "I tried to fight her advances, \"I don't know if that's such a good idea.\""
quote: "She proceeded to close the door and take off her shirt."
quote: "\"Those breasts are deadly. You're deadly and you need to stop.\" I still had a bit of fight in me until she sat on my lap."
quote: "A man can only resist so much until he snaps. We snuck away to any office or stairwell we could find whenever she wanted it. I never instigated the sex. It was all her. After the first time I felt like I was doing it just to cover my ass. If she stopped getting her satisfaction, she might have run to the COO and then I'd be back to the unemployment line. This job was the only thing keeping me from snapping. Suddenly, one day, Dominique wasn't at the office anymore. The me, from the past would have looked into why. The me that existed now saw it as a blessing."
quote: "Exit Dominique—enter Brittany, the virgin. We hadn't slept together but everyone already thought we did and in this town, that's as good as actually doing the deed. Our relationship had a hint of flirtation but never went to that next level. We spent our time talking about her boyfriend and my exes. The love of her life was a guy named Peter. For some reason trashing him made me feel a bit better, so that's how I numbed the pain with this buxom blonde. Trashing some random guy only kept me busy for so long though."
quote: "When I met Michelle—a slut, who would one day, surely evolve into a twenty-first-century experienced woman—at a lounge, she was Charlie Sheen drunk. I didn't expect her to last longer than a night but she stuck around for a couple of weeks. I loved her crazy laugh and insane views on life. The ultimate plus was how cunning she could be. She was fiercely smart and knew how to rule a conversation with just about anyone. Everyone underestimated her."
quote: "I actually do think things with Michelle could have continued if not for her evil body. Michelle loved sex—a lot. She wanted it constantly which was fine by me but after the first few times I kept getting sick. At this point, I chalked it up to coincidence. Then it happened again."
quote: "The fourth time was while I was still sick from the third time and that landed me in the hospital. Yes—sex had once again landed me in pain and in the hospital. During our salacious session of sexual gluttony, I literally dropped to one knee. I got back up and threw her on top."
quote: "The way she tells the story, she was riding me and after she had an orgasm she looked down to find me blue in the face and passed out. The veins were protruding from my neck and my body was colder than usual."
quote: "I woke up in the hospital. Given her love for sex all I could think of was shit an STD. I could barely breathe, I was weak all over and my skin was constantly itchy. My doctor was a bubbly old man. His hairline bothered me a bit and when he was in the room I couldn't concentrate on much else. I don't know why men who loose it all on the top, keep the sides. Shave that shit doc—it's not doing anyone any good."
quote: "He looks at my chart. \"It says here you're allergic to latex.\""
quote: "\"Fuck. What is it? An STD? I knew it. It's an STD isn't it?\""
quote: "\"Well judging by that reaction, someone hasn't been using their non-latex condoms.\" Oh, that judgmental look that older folks give you sucks. As if I didn't feel shitty enough, I got the old guy glare. \"You're in luck it seems. Despite your disregard for your health you do not have an STD.\""
quote: "\"I don't get it doc. After sex I feel like my immune system got an ass kicking from the viral equivalent of Jackie Chan.\""
quote: "\"And how do you feel after kissing this...\" he scans my chart for the information that was given when I was admitted, \"Michelle.\""
quote: "I think about it for a minute then I realize even the act of kissing makes me feel strange. \"Actually, now that you mention it doc, I feel pretty woozy after.\""
quote: "\"I'm going to go out on the limb here son and say that Michelle is a smoker.\""
quote: "\"You have another allergy. You're allergic to nicotine. In fact, you're deathly allergic to it.\" He pauses for a reaction, which I don't give up. \"The nicotine that she was transferring to you through her pores and other open spots on her body is killing you. Simply put, you have to stop seeing this girl.\""
quote: "\"In laymen's terms, yes. Even if she were to quit smoking it would take a very long time for her to not make you sick.\""
quote: "\"Is this real? I've never even heard of this. Who the fuck is allergic to a girl?\""
quote: "\"I'll admit that it is a new one for me too Jason however, that doesn't make it any less real.\""
quote: "\"Well damn.\" I pondered the odd situation. First, I'm allergic to latex, then I need to express my feelings to get it up, then the pop and now I'm allergic to nicotine. Do you know how many women smoke these days? Essentially, three-quarters of the female population have become un-dateable."
quote: "\"Are you okay, son?\" The doc looked so serious. I felt a when I was your age speech coming on."
quote: "\"Well your toxicology report came back with some potentially dangerous results, you are clearly on a self-destructive path with your sexual activity and you have a general tone of self-distain.\""
quote: "\"You're actually the first person to ask me if I'm doing alright, instead of telling me to get my shit together.\" I knew I had the protection of doctor, patient confidentiality so I decided to confide in this guy with the horrible hairline. \"A lot has happened in this short life of mine. Recently I lost the love of my life, returned to a job I hate and started drinking, doing drugs, that kind of stuff. I've made some mistakes but I've been beaten up by life, too. No one seems to give a shit, though. I mean, I start out with the best of intentions. I'm not a horrible guy. It's just for some reason, when I try to do good, I do the opposite. It's like a fucking curse or something. Wait, you're not a witch doctor are you? You couldn't check me out and reverse whatever it is that my early life baptismal has caused—could you?\""
quote: "\"When I was your age...\" I knew it was coming. \"...I felt like the world was against me as well. I wanted to be a doctor and everything was standing in the way. We all have to go through trials but we have to remain strong or life will swallow us up.\" It was solid advice but filled with platitude, which doesn't really help."
quote: "\"See, I admire guys like you. You had a course of action and that was to help people. Your life benefits the world. Me? I get people drunk and make them regret it. No matter my intentions, I can't seem to treat a woman right and my relationships go to shit. Even if I was Bill Gates rich, I'd still be miserable. I wanted to be the type of man people admired. Now I'm just a man that can't even look in the mirror.\""
quote: "\"Listen, I must go do my rounds but I want you to give this woman a call.\" He pulls out a piece of paper and writes a number down then hands it to me. \"She can help you figure this stuff out.\""
quote: "As he leaves the room, he has one last piece of advice. \"Go read a book in a library. Maybe there you'll find a nice girl...that doesn't smoke.\""
quote: "I was released a few hours later with some meds and an order to drink plenty of fluids. I used the paper that the doctor wrote the number for a person I can only assume was a shrink, to roll a joint. I may be fucked up right now but there's no chance I was sitting on someone's couch, pouring out my heart and soul, for money I could use to buy a motorcycle or something."
quote: "An ambulance brought me to the hospital and since Michelle had to go to work, I was left sitting on a bench waiting for a cab. That is until I saw Brittany walking past me."
quote: "\"Gonna catch a cab and head to the club to do some work.\""
quote: "\"I have my car here. I'll give you a ride.\""
quote: "On the 10-minute drive, we talked about her relationship and my many relationships. I ended up telling her why I was at the hospital and she almost crashed the car due to an intense case of laughter."
quote: "There was always sexual tension between us and I knew I was just one move away from getting with her but not today for I was way too out of it from my nicotine ordeal and once again my ego was bruised. I mean c'mon—who is allergic to latex and a girl?"
quote: "\"So, what are you going to do about Michelle?\" She asked."
quote: "\"It wasn't that serious. If I don't call, I'm sure she won't care.\""
quote: "\"It was just sex. She saw me at my worse—flaccid—not a good look at all. I have a complex about that kind of shit. It's best if we just part ways and move on. Her—to a man who smokes. Me—to a virgin, that doesn't smoke...and is older than me...and who likes Miami.\""
quote: "We pulled up to the club and enjoyed a few vodka, Red Bulls inside where our conversation became heated. She resented that I thought her and her man were an odd couple and, probably due to the meds, I wasn't really adding the kind of comedy to my insults that made my many previous comments acceptable."
quote: "Her quick exit was perfect. I was alone. I may have even said everything that I did, just to piss her off so she would leave. I really didn't care about much of anything at the moment. Quite simply if someone came in and tried to rob the place—I might have put up a fight just to get shot."
quote: "I sat down and sipped my drink for a bit while popping some meds, examining my life and what it had become. I slept with more women in the last few months than I had throughout my entire life. It seemed I was breaking a lot of my own rules lately and it all started with the break-up. I had become weak. All I wanted was some normal in my life again and that's when I heard her voice."
quote: "KIM WAS STANDING OVER ME, holding a bag of Mc Donald's food. Her arrival should have cued an epic operatic theme with light coming from behind. I jumped out of my seat and gave her a huge hug. She hugged me back just as tight."
quote: "\"Family thing. Me and the cowboy needed some time apart, so the timing was good.\""
quote: "\"Positive energy. Wanna lend me some? Maybe I can use it to hide my many serious character defects and huge flaws.\""
quote: "\"No matter how flawed you continue to get, I can't stop caring about what happens to you,\" she said with a certain level of suspense. I could see in her face that she was dying to know what I was up to and at the same time, she knew she probably didn't want to hear the sorted details."
quote: "Regardless, I told her everything. She's very animated so her face could always tell me when to stop with the details and glaze over some facts."
quote: "I stand up and lean on the back of my seat. I'm shocked. \"You can't call me that.\""
quote: "\"Yes...well...to a degree.\" I had to collect my thoughts. This argument would have to be great to get some respect back. \"While I will admit that a couple of the girls were simply there to keep me warm at night, I did honestly try with many of these women.\""
quote: "She wasn't buying it. I thought to myself—damn it Jason, you're in sales, kinda, SELL!"
quote: "\"Ok think of it this way. If you go to a store, you try on a bunch of dresses and eventually find the right one. That's what I have been doing with women. I can list each of their redeeming qualities. I was genuinely interested in these women. It just turns out I may have also been using them to get over Mia.\""
quote: "\"I can't believe you threw that guy through a window.\""
quote: "\"You don't exactly keep things private. I've seen your Facebook statuses and tweets. When you're drunk, you unload. Oh and deleting them the next day doesn't help because everyone's already seen them.\""
quote: "Ugh. \"I know. I know. I'm just trying to find someone to make me even half as happy as my angel.\""
quote: "\"So, if I'm following you right, you're basically saying you're not a player, you just date a lot?\""
quote: "\"Exactly! And great spin on a classic song by the way.\" She was referring to the hip-hop track Still Not a Player by Big Pun."
quote: "\"The way I see it. I'll never find a girl I like unless I hunt for her.\""
quote: "\"Have you ever thought of just not sleeping with every girl while you're hunting?\""
quote: "\"Ever thought of not drinking constantly to bury your feelings?\""
quote: "\"Ever thought that maybe, there's other girls out there that could make you just as happy as Mia—and maybe they're right in front of you?\""
quote: "The meds clearly made me clueless, for I didn't get what she was saying, \"Nope.\""
quote: "\"Well, despite the fact that you smell like sex and cigarettes, I still love you but maybe take some time off from the women, put down the drink and relax.\""
quote: "\"You're a smart cookie, Kim...and you have no idea how much it means to me that you haven't written my silly ass off.\""
quote: "\"Of course you're dangerously close to losing that respect. Start acting like the man I saw when you were with Mia and not some horny geek boy.\""
quote: "There it was. I couldn't lose Kim's respect for she was the only one that still had some reminisce of emotion to give me. All of the women I had been running around with were surely bashing me all over town. The industry folk were laughing behind closed doors because I just wasn't as sharp as I had been in the past, even though I was still successful. Oh and Mia, well let's just say I heard she used the word \"crazy\" to describe me more than once."
quote: "Despite all that had happened, I went to bed that night feeling a bit better about myself. Kim was back, for a while at least, and she could still look me in the eyes. This was a step in the right direction. She helped me realize that I was girl hopping and that would end in the morning. Kim was right—sex wasn't a necessary part of getting to know all women. Tomorrow I would fight the good fight."
quote: "I woke up midway through the night to a text from Brittany—Me and Peter are in a fight. You at home?"
quote: "About an hour later she was sitting in my kitchen, crying. The reality of their almost nuptials was setting in."
quote: "\"I don't know where everything started going so wrong.\" She was looking up at me with her big puppy dog eyes begging for an answer."
quote: "Unfortunately, it was time to be harsh. \"Brittany, you're a virgin.\""
quote: "\"Um yes you are. You're a virgin but not of the it's too tight to fit a popsicle stick variety. You're a life virgin.\""
quote: "\"Well you come from the perfect little family with a dad that administers your finances. You're living in a big house with the dude you've dated since Grade 10. He was a jock. You were a cheerleader. Now reality is coming into play. You've had to take extra work as a go-go dancer where you are discovering there are more than just farm boys in the world. He's getting drunk more frequently and watching club guys try to grab on his girl so he's going to subconsciously find some revenge. You two thought you'd build a life right out of a 50's sitcom in the twenty-first century. You didn't realize when your life changes and you get some more experience there's different penises.\""
quote: "\"The older you get the smaller the penises and the larger the vaginas become.\""
quote: "\"I hate to say it but yes. You have comparisons to draw from and comparisons usually equal disappointment.\""
quote: "\"I'm a realist. Doesn't mean you should stop taking chances but expecting to live as if life is in black and white is a fool's errand. The world is full of color.\""
quote: "\"Realistically? Yes. I give you guy's 5 months tops. I'll put twenty bucks on it.\""
quote: "\"You're an asshole. But for some reason hearing you say it now makes more sense than hearing it earlier.\""
quote: "\"Oh ya, any girl would be lucky to have you. Not.\""
quote: "At any other point in the last few months, I would have used the tension in the air to move in for a kiss. Tonight—I was working on being a better man."
quote: "Brittany and I spent the rest of the night watching The Godfather. She needed an escape and wanted to understand what was so great about the movie. Once it ended she left a bit wiser and me; a bit prouder to be Jason Mytez."
quote: "I actually did it. I had a hot girl in my kitchen in a state that would have made the intercourse easy, and I just hung out with her. Doing this with Brittany was especially hard because she's actually a trophy friend. You keep her around to look at and man is she fun to gaze upon now and then. Kim would be so proud."
quote: "It was late and I needed my beauty sleep. As I dozed off, I felt like I had turned a corner in my life."
quote: "WE HAD JUST OPENED A NEW CLUB named Light. It's a modern chic nightclub with the promise of, once again, changing the club industry. Light is the perfect amount of the competitor's dark charm and our technologically advanced approach. It was a smash success and after three weeks, we were confident we had a winner."
quote: "This was an exciting time to be in the company. Our clubs were busy, ideas were flowing, and everyone was working together. Personally speaking, I hadn't screwed anyone—literally or metaphorically in awhile. I was hanging out with Kim and Brittany on a regular basis, which kept me on my best behavior. I hadn't thrown back more than a drink or two a night, in about a month. The drugs stopped completely."
quote: "So, what do you do when life is good? You celebrate."
quote: "A bunch of us that were behind the opening of the club got together at a restaurant to feast on fantastic steak and then headed over to Light in a limo. I took one step out of the double stretch limo and I knew I was in trouble. It was just a feeling but a strong one much like when my dad called about my mom or when Mia asked me to come back to Rodney's studio."
quote: "Once inside, I could see my instincts had not failed me. I expected to see Dominique, as she was helping with the administrative side at the club but I didn't expect to see all of the other exes. On this night, Jason was going to atone for his sins."
quote: "I dodged the deadly women at every turn, rushing to get to the table we reserved. When I turned the corner, I found some friends that were meeting me at the club and unbelievably enough—Lillian!"
quote: "\"Hey.\" I could feel the kindness. She walked right up to me and gave me a big hug. The crazy bitch was calm—amazingly so. \"How are you?\""
quote: "\"We probably shouldn't be standing here.\" She knew what I was saying right away. We were standing in a room full of mirrors. Now I know how kids must feel when they see their childhood Priest—utter fear."
quote: "\"Oh you're so funny. Don't worry. I'm done breaking mirrors.\" She continued. \"I'm different now as I'm sure you are.\" She holds up her hand to reveal an engagement ring."
quote: "\"His name is David and we're perfect together. I love him so much.\""
quote: "I couldn't help but feel a bit saddened by the news. This crazy chick that stabbed me with that $450 mirror is in love and getting married while I can't seem to find anyone that can handle me for more than 5 minutes."
quote: "While we talked, I couldn't help but notice her new sense of calm. I hadn't seen her in years and today she stood in front of me a very different woman."
quote: "The conversation lasts for a few more moments before David swoops in and steals her away. I look around and see no exes in sight. It seemed like the perfect time to grab a drink from the bar."
quote: "While waiting for a drink, to my surprise, Michelle cornered me and moved in for a kiss. I hadn't told her about the nicotine out of embarrassment. There were just too many sexual disasters in my life to be truthful about any of that shit. I probably could have handled things better. She called once after the hospital visit to see how I was, then twice, and then a few more times before she quit. It was a shitty way to handle things but I honestly didn't think she would care."
quote: "\"Oh stop it, Jason. Don't act like you don't want it.\""
quote: "\"I've just been sleeping with too many randoms lately.\" Shitty move."
quote: "\"Randoms? Is that all you think of me. A random?\""
quote: "\"No of course...\" I don't like lying so I decide to tell Michelle the cold hard truth about Jason Mytez. \"Yes Michelle. Let's face it. It was all about sex with us.\" Sensing another hospital visit in my future, I cup my balls and get in a defensive stance."
quote: "\"You're a real dick. You know that? I liked you. Who knows why?\""
quote: "\"I couldn't tell you. I didn't really give you any reason to give a shit about me. Upside though—I never treated you like a slut.\""
quote: "\"Well maybe you just did. Maybe right now I feel like a slut.\""
quote: "I let out a deep sigh. When I'm backed into a corner, I'm often too truthful. \"Maybe then, you should be looking at yourself in the mirror and asking why.\""
quote: "I should have kept cupping my balls because that knee came in fast and hard. For those of you that have never been hit in the balls or for the women out there that can't possibly imagine how it feels, let me tell you. Take all the air out of your body, the stinging sensation of rubbing alcohol on a wound and the feeling of your skin being twisted by a pro-wrestler. You now have a vague idea of the kind of pain I was feeling."
quote: "After about fifteen-minutes holed up in the corner on a chair I was finally ready to get mobile. My friends didn't even come looking for me—some friends. I'm barely up and that's when I'm pushed back down on the couch by a very drunk Vanessa—yes, latex girl."
quote: "She jumped right on my lap, straddling me with those perfect tits staring me in the face. She grabbed me by the cheeks forcing me to look her in the face. Her eyes indicate high and her breath indicates drunk."
quote: "\"Vanessa we haven't spoken in years and last I heard, you're engaged.\""
quote: "She lets out a little burp before continuing. \"I mean...my friend that's like sisters.\""
quote: "\"You're drunk and can barely pull a sentence together but I think you're trying to say that your fiancé cheated on you. Trust me, this is not how you want to handle it.\""
quote: "\"C'mon you know you want to.\" This seems like it's going to be the theme of the night. But I have to be smart here. I don't want to end up huddled in this corner for another fifteen."
quote: "\"Vanessa, you're drunk and tomorrow when you wake up you want to wake up a woman without guilt, not next to me. Trust a person who has become a bit of an expert—I understand the attraction of vengeance—it's no way to live.\""
quote: "She has no response. She just stares at me—awkward. Then the stare goes through me as if she's not all there. I know that look. I've been in the club business long enough to understand what's coming. I move fast but not fast enough. The woman who I gave my precious virginity to pukes all over the couch and right on the sleeve of my blazer."
quote: "\"You're not going to help?\" One of her girlfriends asks while attempting to prop Vanessa up."
quote: "\"Fuck no. You guys let her get that drunk now you can deal with her being that shitty. Besides, that's the second time she's thrown up on me.\""
quote: "\"Oh you're the guy that's allergic to latex,\" the friend says while bursting out laughing."
quote: "\"Oh you're the chick that has to clean up puke and whatever else discharges from her drunk body, who's the loser here?\""
quote: "I hear her friend call me something that sounds like asshole. I'm not entirely sure, nor do I care. The whole thing was weird but alcohol will do that. She was still a good girl from what I heard. Vanessa had the ring, a full scholarship, and volunteered for United Way. She was the picture of domestic bliss. When that picture gets fuzzy even the best of us slip. This was her moment to fall. She'd thank me in the morning for being a gentleman...or not."
quote: "After Lillian, Michelle, and Vanessa, all I want at this point, is to escape. I figure that karma has come to take me on in a battle to the death—a battle that I had no interest in fighting."
quote: "Out of the corner of my eye, I see Dominique but again, my reflexes are just a moment too slow. Armed with a rum and Coke, she plays target practice with my face and gets a bull's eye. Standing there, dripping wet I can only resort to one of my favorite expressions, \"Mother fuck.\""
quote: "Up until now, no one knew about Dominique and I, but this changes everything. There will be questions asked tomorrow."
quote: "\"Well I feel a bit better,\" she says as she drops the cup on the ground."
quote: "I finally get my vision back only to see Dominique ready to engage in some war games, but fuck it—I don't care. I'm not even sure what the hell that was about but if I stood there any longer there would have been a much more intense incident and that's the last thing I needed in my life right now."
quote: "As I start to walk away, she shouts out a very ominous message. \"Oh, you're just going to ignore me? Fine. If that's how you want it. Run.\""
quote: "Finally—I'm outside. The bass from the club is pounding and the vacuum of sound continues as the door opens and closes behind patrons. I drop down on the sidewalk with my feet hanging over the curb—waiting for a cab. I'm a bit tipsy but not drunk, I'm wet, my balls ache and I have puke on my jacket. Fan—fucking—tastic."
quote: "That's when, out of the corner of my eye, I catch Mia storming over towards me. She looks pissed, and why not? Everyone's pissed. I'm surprised I haven't pissed off Mother Nature—for I must have wronged her in some way. That's if that wind blowing, crying, snow-snorting bitch has a vagina. I've never seen blood fall from the sky so I doubt it."
quote: "I'm not even in the mood to dodge her. I'm just going to shut up and take it. I climb to my feet bewildered, ready for the storm because every woman on Earth is drunk and wants a piece of me tonight."
quote: "However, as I prepare for a Mia moment, I am spun around and the most perfect feeling lips reach in for a kiss. I don't even get the opportunity to see whom I'm kissing but it's a damn good lip lock. Shit, for the first time in a bit a kiss gets me hard."
quote: "\"She's gone,\" says the mystery woman. When we pull away, I see, Alex White—a socialite whom I've only had a quick conversation with once. She's hot and I'm confused."
quote: "Noticing my confusion she cracks a smile and reveals her motives, \"I hate that bitch.\""
quote: "\"Don't sound so surprised. Not too many people like her but everyone's too scared to tell you what they think of your precious little angel.\""
quote: "\"Well my balls ache, I have puke on my jacket and rum really stings the eyes.\""
quote: "\"Fuck yes I have. And I just want it to end.\""
quote: "She pulls a pen out of her purse and writes her number on my forehead. Yes, my forehead. I'm too out of it to actually care that I now had ink right across my face. I just thought, meh, it accents the puke nicely."
quote: "\"I hate everyone you hate. That must mean something, right? Maybe we're soul mates.\" She gives me a kiss on the cheek, followed by a little bite on the neck then heads back into the club."
quote: "One thing is certain—I am not getting to bed tonight without dreaming about this witty little bleach blond belle. No girl can possibly be that cool."
quote: "THE AFRICAN MASK ON MY WALL looks funny upside down. For some reason right side up it has African features and upside down, it looks like an old Asian man. I notice these things after great sex, hanging half off my bed."
quote: "Alex falls on top of me kissing my neck. We're both exhausted but giddy. After three dates the sexual tension was cut—finally. Now you may think—three dates isn't that long of a wait. But, with two busy people, three dates take almost a month and a half. Kim would once again be proud of me for I, Jason Mytez, waited."
quote: "I had always been a fan of brunettes but this blond had fire like no girl I had ever met. She didn't like when anyone mentioned her hair color, as she hated the jokes so in her witty style, she asked to be referred to as yella. She had a great sense of humor. She was short, which I liked but not as toned as my usual women. Even so, I found her incredibly attractive."
quote: "While she was sweet, Alex had a wild and crazy side that was revealed by her kissing strangers in a parking lot and a huge tattoo up her left side with the words crazy, sexy, cool interwoven into the design."
quote: "\"I've had three orgasms in my life and that was the third.\" She says while resting her head on my chest—my blood rushing to my head but I don't want to move because she's comfy."
quote: "\"Three? That's it?\" I'm shocked. The girl has some experience. She's a hard worker—she's the twenty-first-century experienced woman looking to complete the stereotype with a good man."
quote: "She sits up in the bed, grabbing my wrist and pulling me towards her. \"Are you mocking me?\""
quote: "\"No I'm mocking the guys before me. That's horrible. Did your g-spot somehow end up in the lost and found until now?\""
quote: "\"Well this could be a one-time thing. Maybe this is the only orgasm you'll give me.\""
quote: "\"Fuck that sexay laday. I'm going to deliver every time.\""
quote: "\"Every time huh? Maybe I'll hold you to that.\""
quote: "\"Okay. If that's realistic then that's what you'll do. I'm gonna hold you to that ninety-percent or I'm going to cut you off for a month.\""
quote: "I can't tell if she's joking or if she'll actually follow through. After a few minutes, I learn she's serious. She really wants me to maintain the average and me being the cocky jackass that I am—I feel I'm equal to the task."
quote: "\"Orgasms aren't everything but you guys think they are so now you've fucked yourself Jason,\" she says with a wink."
quote: "After another month of dating, I can feel a relationship coming on. All of the signs are there—spending tons of time together, calling and texting constantly and when I'm on trips we video Skype. The cherry on top is that I was showing her affection in the club. The last woman to get that kind of attention was Mia. Yep—this is a relationship no matter what I have to say about the subject."
quote: "In this relationship, I will have to learn to accept that there are some things I can't control. When we're good, we're amazing, but we dip into the sauce a bit hard at times and that leads to some solid fights. That's okay though because at the end of it all, old school happiness is not adventurous enough for us."
quote: "That old school conventional happiness does shine through the cracks at times though—I can't lie. I've met her parents and she's met mine. Some times domestication feels good—but not too often."
quote: "We choose to be a bit crazier than your average couple. Case in point—our second date. We went out for an intimate dinner at a small New York style restaurant. You know the kind—one wilting flower in the middle of the table accompanied by a candle dancing rampantly because the owner refuses to fix the drafty areas that have become more prevalent with the years of neglect. There's a cute little checkered tablecloth and the chairs are re-stained wood so thick that it feels like you're sitting on a cushion. We were tucked in a corner away from everyone, separated by a small wooden wall with faux-stained glass."
quote: "\"This place is cute,\" she says as we sit down."
quote: "\"Yeah, I'm trying to get in your pants by relating to your sweet and innocent side.\" I say with a cheeky smile."
quote: "\"Is that your only goal? Get me in bed and then sneak out the back?\""
quote: "\"Well if I get you into bed it will probably be mine since your roommates apparently never leave. I guess you'll be the one that has to sneak out the back.\""
quote: "The waiter interrupts with the usual banter about specials and trying to up sell us on their great desserts that can only be complimented by an expensive bottle of wine. The momentary distraction almost makes me forget about her comment."
quote: "\"Getting me into your bed might be too much for you. Not sure you could keep up.\""
quote: "As she finishes the sentence, I feel her foot slip up in between my legs. She uses just the right amount of pressure to give me one of those raging hard-ons where you feel like you're going to explode. I can feel the blood pumping. Oh man, if I don't get laid, this is going to lead to one serious case of the blue balls."
quote: "I try to hide my obvious attraction, \"You think you're that good huh?\""
quote: "\"Jason. Once I'm done sucking you off you're gonna wish you got a ring because you won't want me to leave.\""
quote: "She says this just as the waiter is walking up to our table. It's a bit awkward as he delivers our drinks and takes our orders. This type of conversation can make people feel uncomfortable. Me? I love it. It's true twenty-first-century romance. Open sexuality hints at how much you want the other person. Sure you won't see her last comment on a Hallmark card any time soon but I'd much rather that than some cheap cliché about the heart and longing with desire."
quote: "Fast-forward to our third date and that twenty-first-century woman opens her twenty-first-century mouth with some more twenty-first-century romance once again. As I'm carrying her to the bedroom, she looks me deep in my eyes and with a completely serious face she says, \"If you hit my head you're only getting a blow job tonight.\""
quote: "Good thing she's light because I burst out laughing so hard that tears were streaming down my face. Ten-pounds heavier and I would have dropped her right down the hard metal stairs."
quote: "When we're not partying with our friends we're cuddled up in bed watching movies or playing with the dog she bought just a month before we met. I keep her company during the two-hour hair, makeup, and eyelash sessions as she gets ready for a night on the town and she rubs my head when the headaches set in from my stressful job."
quote: "It was a great relationship filled with plenty of life long memories and I'm convinced nothing would have stood in our way if she hadn't asked that fateful question five months in, \"Can you take me to Miami and show me what your life was like there?\""
quote: "\"You talk about it like it's the happiest place on Earth. I want to see what you're like there and you have to show me the sights. I want to know Miami, Jason.\""
quote: "Unfortunately, it didn't take much convincing for me to book the tickets and pack our suitcases. The first few days are great and in fact, the trip as a whole is fantastic. We hit the clubs, she shops—too much, we hit the boardwalks and swim in the ocean. I show her where I lived while I was there and she actually wants to try the biggest burger in town. She can't even get through a quarter of it before tapping out, although I won't hold it against her, she's so tiny."
quote: "Outside of that restaurant though, our lives go to hell and we don't even know it yet. As we exit, I run into DJ Energy—a friend of mine in Miami and local promoter as well."
quote: "\"Holy, what's up papi?\" Yes, he tries a bit too hard to be cool for this Northern boy but he's a good person nonetheless."
quote: "\"What's up brotha? Long time no see.\" I'm excited to see a friend. In the club business, people change their numbers and emails so often as they bounce from property to property it can be hard to nail someone down at times."
quote: "After a few minutes of conversation he drops the bomb which at the time seemed innocent enough, \"You know the guys I'm working for run 5 clubs out here and a couple of lounges. They need a guy that does what you do. No one's got the net on lock like you.\""
quote: "\"Oh ya? Well here's my number and call me if something real comes up.\""
quote: "\"I gotcha papi.\" We continue our conversation for a bit. I introduce him to Alex and of course, he tries to turn on his Miami tan boy charm. She shoots him down hard though—another thing that makes me like this girl. She be fierce."
quote: "As we walk away, I see a bit of concern in her face. \"Don't worry, babe. It's just industry talk. There's no way he gets me a job and sets me up as good as my job back home.\""
quote: "She smiles and with that, we continue our trip not giving the conversation another thought."
quote: "WHY DO I STILL HAVE AN ALARM CLOCK? This is one of the first things I think every morning when I wake up. Each night before I go to bed, I set my iPhone to the song I'd like to wake up to and then place it on top of my alarm clock, which is unplugged."
quote: "I pick up the ugly, large relic of the 90's, saunter on downstairs, open the door to my deck, and throw it into the abandoned building across the street. It breaks into a thousand little pieces with each catching a bit of sunlight as they fall to their final resting place."
quote: "Therapy, just like Miami. We were a week removed from our trip and I was feeling pretty freakin' great."
quote: "The doorbell rings. I answer to find a man in a suit with an envelope."
quote: "Served? What did I do that I would deserve sitting in a courtroom? I pull the papers out of the envelope to find that Dominique is suing me for sexual harassment."
quote: "The documents say that she was forced to change her job post because of me. I guess that explains her sudden departure from the office and move to Light. The document then goes on to state that I threatened her job when she wouldn't sleep with me."
quote: "For a moment I panic but a thought hits me. I've already won this battle and she doesn't even know it yet. On a drunken night after the bar, she wanted to tape us having sex. I believe at one point in the video she talks about how much sex we have and how much she loves it."
quote: "When she didn't bring it up the next morning, I just assumed she was too drunk to remember. I hadn't given it a second thought until now. Either I take the tape to court with me, or she drops the whole thing once she gets a copy of the tape delivered to her home."
quote: "The actual incident doesn't bother me. Where I really start to feel one way or another about the whole mess is the personal nature of the attack. Dominique used to attend my events and she was such a cool girl. Before that first night together, she still seemed so cool. What happened? Did I do something to her? I swear I must have something in my DNA makeup that turns women into crazy whores."
quote: "As I lay back down in bed, I remember why I woke up in the first place. My phone rings again. It's my friend, Energy, from Miami."
quote: "\"Hey, what's up?\" I answer, trying not to sound like I'm still in bed—professional voice."
quote: "\"PAPI! I told you I've got the hook-up. The boys down here in Miami want you to come out and do your net thing.\""
quote: "I may be groggy but that catches my attention. For anyone, the move to Miami would be a no brainer. Winnipeg is cold and barren. Miami is hot and the ocean is amazing. \"Do tell.\""
quote: "\"They need someone like you out here and I want you out here.\""
quote: "\"They'll match what you're getting there. Hey, I know you're still asleep so wake up and think about it and get back to me alright?\""
quote: "I lay in bed for another 4 hours contemplating the future. Do I return to my favorite city with my dreams in tact or do I maintain my stable lifestyle here in Winnipeg? There are so many pros and cons. In Winnipeg, I have that stable lifestyle that everyone who's pretending to be an adult needs, but I have nothing but drama and stress. There are people with a real hate on for me, ex-girlfriends that continue to meddle in my life, an endless cycle of violence and stupidity. In Miami, I'm taking a huge risk. I will never again be able to return to the industry in Winnipeg if I leave. The clubs won't take me back and this large corporation that I'm working for will most likely black list me."
quote: "After my dad received the ultimate in severance packages from his work, my parents decided to try again. With money no longer an issue, they set out to travel to all the places they never saw in the first fifty-plus years of their lives. My brother was in Ontario getting his education in the challenging field of the arts. This made leaving family no longer an issue as it was, just a few years ago."
quote: "A fresh start seems very appealing right now and lets face it—the window of taking such risks is closing. I've given myself until thirty-five to take the crazy risks and get to where I want to go. If, after that, I'm still in the same boat financially I settle down with a company and live the boring, mundane Canadian dream of pensions, 401K's, retirement in my sixties and all that stuff that makes me want to puke my freakin' guts out."
quote: "Miami seems like a natural choice given these circumstances but there's one seriously adorable complication—Alex."
quote: "I may not feel the same way about her that I felt with Mia but different does not necessarily mean worse. She says my name in such a way that I feel my aura beam. When we have sex, it's unreal. Her orgasms are so climatic and intense. When she's drunk she does this dance that—well I'm not sure what it does for me—but it's good."
quote: "I can be my broken, ridiculous, self-loathing but yet self-absorbed self with Alex. Damn, this girl has put a wrench in my otherwise seemingly perfect plans."
quote: "\"Why do you keep getting up and moving around so much?\" She asks as she rolls onto my chest. Yep, she was sleeping in my bed this whole time and has no idea that I'm weighing out this huge decision that would effect us both."
quote: "I've decided to do the typical man thing and pretend nothing is bothering me despite her constant probing. I wait until the scene is just right. After an entire day of stalling, I take her to dinner at our favorite restaurant. We've just spent the day in bed having sex, watching movies and little does she know I've been preparing her for the bomb that I drop in three, two, one..."
quote: "\"I knew it. I knew something was up,\" she says loudly upon hearing the news of my maybe move to the city of salsa."
quote: "\"I knew you knew. I just didn't want to necessarily discuss it in that setting.\""
quote: "\"You wanted to butter me up with a day of relaxation and a nice dinner, huh?\""
quote: "\"You know me all too well.\" I pause, reading her face for any sort of an indication as to what she's thinking—nothing. \"So what do you think?\""
quote: "\"Well it sucks.\" Shit! \"I obviously don't want you to go. We're just at the beginning of this and it's so good. It wouldn't be too legit if we weren't able to figure out what this actually is.\""
quote: "Fuck. Again, all I can think in my head is fuck. I don't know what I expected."
quote: "When Alex and I started this thing, we made the rules clear. No relationship talk and instead of making us home, we were the get away from the everyday for each other."
quote: "How many relationships do you think start out that way? It seems so easy in the beginning when she's just a sexy body and a cute face but then you notice the details—the smile, the little line under her chin, the way she says your name. Feelings come in to play. What am I going to do?"
quote: "\"Oh ya. That sounds like a plan. Mia, round two? No thanks.\""
quote: "\"And so am I. I'm not like you or Mia. I don't hate it here. If I were to move, it would be to Toronto but I really don't want to. It's either me and Winnipeg or Miami.\""
quote: "She still finishes dinner with me and puts on a brave front. When we got back to my place, she gave me a kiss goodnight then walked to her car. I looked out my window to see her still parked outside and crying. It cut me like a knife. How could I think of leaving such a wicked girl?"
quote: "Five days later, I was still contemplating what to do. I knew where Alex stood. My friends thought I was crazy to give up on my dreams for a girl even when I counter that I often dreamt of the girl, too. The worst part was, I didn't even think I could articulate how hard this decision was for me, which I could feel was pushing her away."
quote: "To top things off, even though Dominique dropped the lawsuit after a triumphant viewing of the sex tape with our attorneys, I was suspended from my job for three-months. It turns out that Dominique had the papers sent to the company as well since the suit was in relation to our employ there. This puts another point in the pro-Miami column."
quote: "My mom puts everything in perspective when I ask her advice, \"Do what feels right. Do whatever your gut says.\""
quote: "\"The problem is my gut says things with Alex probably won't last and that's no reflection upon her or us. It's just me speaking from experience. Look at how good things were with Mia and like a light switch was flipped—our lives were torn apart.\""
quote: "\"I know. I know. Believe me I know. But Miami isn't Winnipeg. I hate it here except for her. Every great thing I wanted to do with this company got screwed up. Out there, they embrace creativity and I don't have to pretend I like the business world. Out there, I get to be me. No more pretending.\""
quote: "\"But eventually it won't be this perfect dream you have in your head any more kiddo. Reality will set in there too. You'll get involved with girls who might turn into exes with some hatred for you—since you seem to do that so well. You're going to have to piss off some people. You'll have to make choices that will make people love and hate you just like here.\""
quote: "Another two days pass and I still had not made my choice. DJ Energy was blowing up my phone. I hadn't slept. On my bedroom wall, I had Familiarity & Alex vs. Dreams & Staying True to Me written in big blue letters. These were my choices."
quote: "As I sat staring at the big pieces of paper, Alex came walking in the front door. She looked solemn and it's obvious she'd been crying."
quote: "\"I need you to pick because the waiting is killing me.\" She couldn't possibly get anymore direct than that."
quote: "I give her the only answer I know to give. \"I still don't know. I'm not picking between Eminem and Jay-Z here. This isn't just a choice. This is a major life decision and there's a lot at stake. I'm not moving there on a whim this time. This one is probably for good.\""
quote: "We stand in silence—me looking at her, she looking at the floor. I take her into my arms and we lay down on the couch in complete and total silence for almost an hour. I just rub her hair out of habit. We trick each other into thinking the other is asleep—or at least we like to think we do."
quote: "Finally Alex has the resolve that I should have had, \"You should go.\""
quote: "Surprised, we part and she looks at me with tears in her eyes."
quote: "\"I hate it, but you should go. You've been dreaming of Miami for a long time. You'll stay for me in the end, because that's who you are. You're kind. You want to make me happy and will do it at the expense of your own happiness. I'm your only reason to stay but now I'm telling you to go.\""
quote: "\"While I don't share the same high opinion that you have of me, thank you for saying it.\""
quote: "\"The only condition is that you have to leave and never look back so don't call me, text me, Facebook me, tweet me, nothing. I need to get you out of system as fast as possible. I love you for loving me and I hate you for loving that city. You just have to go because it's what you really want.\""
quote: "She's younger than I am but in this moment so much wiser."
quote: "We kiss. It's one of those quivering kisses where the salty tears get in the way but no one cares—and like that, she's gone. This awesome girl gives me possibly the greatest kiss and gift of my life and then she's just...gone."
quote: "That night I lay in bed, stunned. She has made the choice for me but in my mind, I still had yet to make my own decision. There were just too many angles here. The internal debate now comes down to familiarity or risk."
quote: "I went to bed and turned on my iTunes. Just like in the movies, the first random song plays—The Clash \"Should I Stay or Should I Go?\" Irony it seems."
quote: "ANOTHER DAY where I wake up conflicted. I decide to seek council with the voice of reason in my life—Kim. The problem is I can't get a hold of her. We really hadn't talked much since Alex and I started dating. Isn't that always the way?"
quote: "I finally give up and retreat to my couch picturing that last memory with Alex. I even tried to contact her a few times but true to her form, she was getting me out of her system. She has to hate me, because that gives her the power back."
quote: "I hear a knock at the door but I am not in the mood to see anyone. The knocking continues—and again. Finally, I get up and head to the door. Whomever it was, that wouldn't leave me alone was about to get an earful—or not. It's Kim."
quote: "\"Where have you been? I've been trying to get a hold of you. I need you now more than ever.\" I'm begging for her advice."
quote: "\"I have been in town for a few months. I told you that my boyfriend and I were on a break. I brought you food. I sat up late nights listening to you talk about who you want to be as a man. I've put in all of the work and still, I wait.\""
quote: "\"Wait for you to come to your senses and ask me out!\""
quote: "\"You're one of my best friends. The girl I come to for advice.\""
quote: "She looks me dead in the eyes. \"And that's all I'll ever be to you, right? The girl you keep around for advice?\" Suddenly this good girl looks down right evil."
quote: "\"Really? Every girl in this city got a chance to be with you and I get the complaining.\""
quote: "\"I don't know what to say. I thought we decided we would just be friends.\""
quote: "\"No you decided. I was waiting for you to make your move and you haven't. I've waited years. Now you're calling me because what, your precious Alex isn't talking to you or, maybe it's Mia? On the other hand, maybe the other 35 girls you've been with have told you to go to hell. Do you know what being treated like this does to a girl? You only call when you need something.\""
quote: "My eyes are wide; my mouth is on the floor. I've never seen this side of Kim before."
quote: "\"All you ever think of is yourself. You always tell me I should stand up for me so that's what I'm doing right now. I wanted to come and see you face to face to tell you that I'm going back to my boyfriend because you've treated me horribly and, at the very least, have shown me why he's the better man.\""
quote: "\"But Kim, c'mon. I didn't know you felt this way. You have to tell me how you feel for me to know.\""
quote: "I tried to grab onto her but Kim pulled away."
quote: "\"Go get your advice from someone else.\" She lets out a scream. \"I can't believe I wasted all of this time waiting for you.\""
quote: "As the door slams behind her, I fall against the wall. This is the second great girl that has cut me out of her life in a matter of days."
quote: "In takes me only moments to realize that Kim is right—I treated her terribly. I used her as a crutch and only called her when I needed something. Jesus fuck, I'm an asshole."
quote: "My stomach is in knots. Miami—with immigration issues and their loose lifestyle—doesn't have any stability. Winnipeg sucks. Alex and Kim have left me in their dust. All of the exes hate me except for the ones that are getting married and all I can think is that this is entirely my fault. These girls aren't bad people. I just somehow make them that way. I'm the only common link. It has to be me."
quote: "I can hear Kim is still in the hallway so I open the door to see the elevator is taking a bit. I spin her around and move in for a kiss, purely out of instinct. It's not a good kiss—in fact, it's messy and awkward. She pushes me away and stands in front of me for a moment with tears in her eyes."
quote: "\"You shouldn't have done that,\" she says, with pain in her voice. She gives me one final look before she heads for the stairs. The exit door slams behind her and with that—I've lost the good girl."
quote: "In seconds, I learn why the elevator was slow. I turn to close my door when I hear two very familiar laughs. I turn to see Mia and Brittany, drunk standing in front of me with a bottle of red wine. Shiznit, I am in for a world of hurt."
quote: "\"Brittany just broke up with Peter,\" Mia says as she walks past me with the wine and right into my place. I wasn't even aware that the two of them hung out."
quote: "\"I told you, Britt. The virgin is gonna go wild now.\" I say."
quote: "When I get close to her, she grabs me and moves in for the kiss. I pull back, but that doesn't stop her from entering my place."
quote: "I shut the door and find the two girls making themselves at home in my kitchen. The angel and the virgin are drunk, and according to both of them, single. I'm mad, in serious need of a drink, or twelve, and I'm in a dangerous place of self-loathing. This is a cocktail for disaster."
quote: "\"We take pole dancing classes together,\" Mia says, with a hint of flirtation. \"There's two to a class, we were the two. Now, we're friends.\""
quote: "Thirty-minutes of posturing and flirtations go by. I've probably had fifteen-shots of tequila or scotch, or whatever it was that I took out of the cupboard. I don't know anymore and too drunk to give a shit."
quote: "\"Brittany's too shy to say so but she wants you to fuck her Jason.\" They both giggle while I stand there trying to figure out what to do. My mind says do it and so too, do other parts of my body. Brittany's hot. We're both drunk."
quote: "While people often use alcohol as an excuse to do something stupid, they know they made the choice thinking that they will have the excuse later. Fuck it, Alex left me, everyone hates me, Kim is gone, I've practically lost my job and sex seemed to numb my pain before."
quote: "Brittany and I start in the kitchen. I completely forget that Mia is even there as I rip her shirt open. This is sex with no emotion—the complete opposite of what I had with Alex and ironically, Mia."
quote: "I have Brittany against the fridge and it seems like standing is the way to go because she's getting there faster than a formula one-race car. I even forget that Mia is in the room—until her hand touches my back."
quote: "Drunken choices take over and for the second time in my life, I'm engaged in a threesome. I'd be lying if I said the sex isn't a bit rough. Two hot chicks, one very soft carpet. The rawness of the sex makes this, the closest I'll ever come to making a porno."
quote: "After it's all over, I sit in the living room looking down at the girls, sleeping on the carpet. My buddy, Michael left his smokes on the table a few nights ago and since this is a fuck it kind of night—I light one up."
quote: "My decisions, on this night are starting to take hold. I have these two gorgeous women lying in front of me. One was the angel, one was the virgin, and now both have been knocked off coarse. I'm not sure how it'll end for either of them but they will wake up different tomorrow. I just hope the next guy they each meet, keeps them on the right path. I used to be that guy."
quote: "My loneliness made this romp seem like a good idea at the time but now all I can think of is the impending headaches and stress. Mia will wake up sober and hate me even more now. Brittany will begin her process of self-loathing and sexual exploration, all the while trying to suck me into her drama, which I have no interest in. I won't be there for her because frankly—she was a puzzle that I had successfully solved. I got my answers regarding her and Peter's relationship and I was right. Where was my twenty bucks?"
quote: "Then there's always the other clusterfucks that will take place. Alex will find out about all of this and despite leaving me will be hurt. Kim will know I didn't listen to a word she said. People will take sides and that will surely split our friends. However, if I leave and chase my dreams—it's a fresh start."
quote: "Fuck it, I whisper to myself. I'm going to Miami. I'm going to pursue my dreams of living in the most exciting city on earth. I text Energy and give him my answer then start to pack a bag."
quote: "This decision is something that was coming I guess, for when I look around my apartment I realize I owned nothing in it except for a TV and the dining room suite which was falling apart anyway."
quote: "Looking down at Mia and Brittany under the covers, I knew I was making the right choice. I had to get away from these seven...sorry eight, deadly women."
quote: "The eighth deadly woman was the one I never saw coming. This woman disguises herself as one of the original seven but turns out to be a completely different woman all together. Given our history, it could be argued that Mia could no longer be my angel because we would likely never be together again. Life would surely replace her at some point. Lillian was only that crazy bitch with me and I'm sure there were plenty of other examples of change that I could point to, but one thought started to linger."
quote: "I've defined all of these women into their neat and tidy categories—who am I?"
quote: "To sum it up, a For Dummies edition of me if you will—I am a guy in his late twenties that doesn't like anything he sees in the mirror anymore. I, at the very least was hoping that I could say something none of my friends could—I treated all women with respect and I created change. Instead, women turned into walking blow up dolls and I was a part of a machine that did nothing for this world. I had but one stupid, drunken thought—no matter what path I take, I'll hurt everyone in my wake."
quote: "I had created this man by the name of Jason. He was confident and powerful. He got the dream girl and he was impervious to the pain of the industry. Somewhere along the way though, I was committing suicide. I was trying to kill that Jason and I was using these women—these deadly women with their many weapons—to assist me in my death."
quote: "That is why the wind is on my face right now, pulling small pieces of ash from a cigarette that could kill me, bottle of booze in hand, Payless shoes half on the edge of my stone railing, half off. I'm tired of hurting people and being hurt. Twenty-ounces of liquor have a way of giving you what you see in the moment as perspective. My balcony is twelve-floors above the ground. I wonder to myself—is it high enough to kill me?"
quote: "It would be so easy to jump right now and in fact, it would not even feel like jumping. To me it feels like the latex, the nicotine, the cheaters, the liars, the thieves, the club girls, the broken mirrors, the decisions—it feels like they are all pulling me down."
quote: "If I were to take that leap, I would have peace. I close my eyes and imagine the fall—the acceleration, the wind, the feeling. Then something creeps into my thoughts—my family. I can't possibly leave my brother, mom and dad. It simply isn't fair to them. Snap out of it Jason. You can't kill yourself."
quote: "I pull back my feet but I'm just too drunk and start to stumble. My left foot is in the air and my right foot can't get stable. I drop my bottle of booze over the side. The cigarette in my mouth is caught by a gust of wind that pushes me over—luckily not over in the direction of certain death. I land on my ass hard, teetering over the edge but stable enough to feel safe. I almost died. Fuck I almost died. My heart was pounding and I could feel the blood rushing through my veins."
quote: "Instead of death, I could change. I could leave for Miami and treat people the way I wanted to. I could use the club job to make money while I think of how I, Jason Mytez, could change the world."
quote: "This must be one of those moments where a man's life changes forever. I look over the side at the smashed bottle of alcohol on the roof of my car. That's sure to leave a mark. I can't help but laugh. I can't believe I was thinking of jumping."
quote: "That's when I feel it. A hand presses softly on my back. It's enough to completely knock me off balance and send me on a journey twelve-floors to my death. I don't know who pushed me. It could have been Mia or Brittany, or perhaps Alex came back and saw what I had done. Maybe Kim didn't want to be the good girl anymore. There were plenty of suspects."
quote: "Even facing death, I could only picture the women. It's as if I was brainwashed by bouncing boobs and amazing asses. Just before the final blink, I could see them all staring at me while I fell—helpless."
quote: "This is where we met my friends. I told you, you were about to experience my life in a flash, just as I did. My life is flashing before my eyes and that's the sum of it—so hello, and goodbye."
quote: "I wasn't going to Miami to become a new man. I wasn't staying in Winnipeg to continue to be the man I had become. I was just simply leaving it all behind me twelve-floors up. One of the seven deadly women likely proved true to her form and lived up to her name."
quote: "I KNOW WHAT YOU'RE THINKING—what the hell man? You killed Jason? Well the book is called 7 Deadly Women after all. I agree it is sad that he has to die in the end but here's the thing about my other ending—it was too mushy and this was more of a loath story than a love story."
quote: "Killing Jason was like killing a family member for me, but there had to be repercussions for his actions and historically speaking, when alcohol comes into play people make some pretty awful decisions."
quote: "If you sat back and wondered how a man could want to kill himself over a bunch of women then you have lived a charmed life, which is why you lack the understanding in regards to this ending. Jason almost killed himself, not because of women, but because of the path his life had taken. He wanted love and money and had neither. In his mind, he was going to have both much before these crossroads. When faced with his disasters he could not handle the truth that was staring back at him."
quote: "As for the women—there are plenty of motives. When you realize you're part of a collection kept by a guy who you thought was nice, anger could turn into rage when the opportunity is present. There's also the drunken mistake option. Maybe Mia or Britt still had a man in their lives. Alcohol can make even the most innocent into a liar. Maybe one or two of these women were tired of being pushed around and maybe Alex was so disgusted with Jason's choices that she was seeing red."
quote: "At first, I wanted to write a story about how impossible women can be. Then it became a story about how messed up dating can get. Then—a story about loneliness. Then—success vs. love. In the end, it's a story about whatever you want it to be about. I wrote the damn thing and even I'm not sure."
book path: 7 Days and 7 Nights - Wendy Wax.epub.txt
beginWordsDict: {"1":[120],"chapter 1":[12]}
all keys in dictionary have one elem lists!
helper: 120,12
readFrom: 120





quote: "Olivia Moore's day began with a cheating husband and went downhill from there."
quote: "\"No, no 'buts.' Let's recap the facts, shall we?\""
quote: "The sniffling began on the other end of the line."
quote: "\"This man is not available, Clarice, because he's married.\" Olivia's tone turned dry. \"And unless you've been living on a desert island for the last year, you know that I've had some personal experience in this area.\""
quote: "\"Married men do not belong in the dating pool. They're like catfish, Clarice. If you're unlucky enough to reel one in, you're honor-bound to either bash him against the side of the boat or throw him back.\""
quote: "Olivia settled her headphones more firmly in place and squinted out through the small rectangle of glass to the radio station control room beyond. The producer of her call-in advice show, Diane Lowe, cradled a phone between her ear and shoulder, her fingers flying across her computer keyboard as she typed in a list of callers waiting to go on the air with Olivia. After each name, she typed a brief summary of what he or she intended to say."
quote: "Scanning the monitor in front of her, Olivia noted four calls holding, two of them in agreement with her advice to Clarice. The other two, who'd never been married to a \"catfish\" or had the misfortune of dating one, thought Clarice should proceed more slowly."
quote: "Olivia drummed her fingers on the Formica tabletop and wondered how many Clarices her own ex-husband had dated. If you believed the tabloids, there had been truckloads of them. In the end, of course, the actual number hardly mattered; one or one million, the damage was the same."
quote: "Olivia sat up straighter, her thoughts leading her to ask, \"Have you noticed that your boyfriend is the only one who seems to be enjoying himself?\""
quote: "There was a sob. A hiccup. The blowing of a nose—all the more graphic for lack of accompanying video—and then a final sniffle."
quote: "\"Can you hear me, Clarice?\" Olivia leaned into the microphone. She could practically feel Clarice nodding her head."
quote: "Olivia hit the \"drop\" button to kill the call and, without allowing herself time to stop and think, moved on to the next."
quote: "She let half of the women have their say, totally aware of the irony of her advising the \"other woman\" when she'd spent almost six months imagining fates worse than death for James's last fling. Then she moved on to a new caller with a new problem, hoping this one wouldn't hit quite so close to home."
quote: "\"Hi, Olivia. It's, um, about my new boyfriend. And my, um . . . feet.\""
quote: "Olivia heard a snort of laughter from the control room, mercifully out of microphone range, and saw Diane shoot a triumphant fist into the air. Olivia felt the same fine rush of adrenaline; only in radio could the topic move from philandering to feet in less than fifteen seconds."
quote: "Olivia tucked a stray strand of hair firmly behind her ear and got down to work. For several minutes she extracted information from her embarrassed caller. In a husky voice Rachel described the new beefcake boyfriend who only laid hands on her aerobicized body long enough to get to her big toe."
quote: "Glancing down at her own feet in their cushy Aerosoles, she tried to remember how long it had been since her last pedicure."
quote: "The three hours on the air every morning were the most visible part of her day, but the articles she wrote on a regular basis and the fulfillment of her multi-book contract gobbled up what little free time remained. And that was without the promotional appearances the station insisted upon."
quote: "\"Rachel, this isn't a particularly unusual fetish as fetishes go. And it's only a problem if it's a problem for you.\""
quote: "She stood up to pace the postage-stamp-sized room— a highly unsatisfying experience for a pacer of her magnitude—while the husky voice described what incredible shape her toes were now in and offered graphic detail about what her boyfriend liked to do to them."
quote: "The walls of the tiny room pressed inward as Olivia realized that her caller's feet were having a much better sex life than Olivia's entire body was."
quote: "She stopped pacing and waited out the moment of dead air while Rachel of the much-loved toes worked up to the real reason for her call."
quote: "\"My boyfriend just took a job in the shoe department at Saks. He has his hands on other women's feet all the time.\" Her voice broke. \"He comes home from work whistling every day.\""
quote: "Olivia bit down hard on the inside of her cheek and reminded herself that this was a legitimate problem to Rachel, one that deserved her full and serious consideration. Unfortunately, a glance through the window to the control room told her that neither her producer nor the news anchor getting ready to go on at the top of the hour felt any such obligation; they shook with silent laughter, their bodies doubled over with mirth."
quote: "Who could blame them? Her own self-control hung by the slimmest of threads. \"You know, Rachel, as long as you have no reason to believe he's stepping out on you, I'd be careful not to jump to any conclusions. In fact, I suggest you keep your feet planted firmly on the ground and—\""
quote: "Olivia removed her headphones and gathered up the notes now strewn across the table. Pushing the microphone back on its retractable arm, she began to clear her things out of the way. In the control room on the other side of the glass, she could see Diane doing the same."
quote: "Opening the door that separated them, Olivia popped her head into the control room. \"Nice job today, Di. Thanks.\" A quick scan of the room's flat surfaces revealed no candy wrappers or cookie crumbs. The usual McMuffin smells were missing. \"On a new diet?\""
quote: "\"Yeah. I just started the Everything-but-the-Crust Pizza Diet.\""
quote: "\"Oh?\" Olivia felt one eyebrow go up. Her producer approached both eating and dieting with equal enthusiasm."
quote: "\"Today I get ten green olives, five slices of pepperoni, one slice of cheese, and all the anchovies I can eat.\""
quote: "\"Wow.\" Olivia tried not to wince. She didn't have time for fad diet lectures or yet another attempt to persuade Diane to look at the emotional triggers behind her eating."
quote: "\"Hey, Olivia. Loved the feet thing. T.J. asked if you could stop by his office on your way out.\""
quote: "\"Can we make it another time, Anna? I've got less than twenty minutes to make it to an interview.\""
quote: "The pert brunette shrugged apologetically. The top of her head barely reached Olivia's shoulder. \"Sorry. He told me not to let you get away. I don't think it'll take too long.\""
quote: "Resigned, Olivia followed Anna down the corridor past two other studios and another control room. They went through a heavy door that swung shut and locked behind them, then crossed the lobby to the station's general offices."
quote: "T.J. Lawrence smiled and stood when Olivia knocked on his open office door. The sunlight streaming through the window spotlighted his freshly shaved head and glinted off his wire-rimmed glasses. Olivia blinked at the brightness after her stint in the artificially lit studio and took the chair the OM offered."
quote: "T.J. was a bit of a maverick by current radio standards. In the corporate environment that now permeated the industry, his hands-on approach and personal commitment to local production made him a rarity. It also commanded fierce loyalty from the people who worked for him."
quote: "It had been T.J. who'd talked Olivia into moving her show to WTLK, and T.J. who'd put the station and its resources firmly behind her during the media feeding frenzy that followed her divorce."
quote: "In a market where more and more stations relied on prepackaged syndicated programs, he continued to produce and promote local programming, building his on-air talent and staying personally involved in the direction of their shows. As a rule, he was head strategist and chief cheerleader."
quote: "Today, T.J.'s smile lacked its usual wattage, and his warm brown eyes looked troubled. Olivia settled into her chair and looked up at the man perched on the desk in front of her. \"What's the problem, T.J.?\""
quote: "He studied her for a moment as if weighing his words. When he folded his arms across his chest and then crossed his long legs at the ankles, Olivia shifted uncomfortably in her seat. As body language went, his was not promising."
quote: "\"I know you're in a hurry, so I'll spare you the gory details. The problem, as always, is the corporate office in Detroit.\" He paused and shook his head in disgust. \"Normally, I can handle the suits. But this time when I got out my whip and chair, they refused to back off.\""
quote: "T.J. ran a hand over the dome of his head and sighed. \"I'm afraid I'm going to have to take a hard look at it.\""
quote: "\"Yes, well, that's pretty much what Matt said. But WTLK is owned by people who started out marketing dog food, Olivia. To them, one can is pretty much like the next.\""
quote: "\"How do the dog food people expect you to handle this problem?\""
quote: "Olivia made the drive to Figaro, Atlanta's trendiest new Italian restaurant, in record time. Screeching into valet parking, tossing her keys to the attendant, and hurrying around the car toward the canopied entrance, she arrived for her appointment out of breath and totally out of sorts. She hated being late or unprepared, and at the moment she was both. She also hated being interviewed—which left her zero for three. And that was without T.J.'s bombshell thrown in for good measure."
quote: "She'd acquired the red light and other survival techniques when the media decided a radio therapist whose own marriage had crashed and burned made great headlines."
quote: "Keeping her current motto, \"Never forget the potential for disaster,\" firmly in mind, she chatted amiably with the twenty-something reporter. When he pulled out a small tape recorder, turned it on, and placed it on the table between them, she didn't bat an eyelash, but the tiny hairs on the back of her neck stood on end."
quote: "\"No, no, of course not,\" she said as the flashing red light in her head strobed brighter."
quote: "For the first fifteen minutes or so, he stuck to the safe and predictable. Yes, she loved Atlanta. Yes, she was thrilled at the buzz about her show's syndication potential. No, she didn't think being divorced disqualified her from advising others. A Gen X Dr. Laura? No, she hadn't thought of herself in quite that way. After all, she wasn't preaching morality, but trying to help women stand up for themselves."
quote: "More like a Dear Abby, then, with Gloria Steinem tendencies? Though that description came a lot closer to the mark, Olivia didn't come out and say so. Between bites, she bobbed and weaved, trying to duck both the pigeonholes and pitfalls. And all the time, she thought about the decision T.J. would be making."
quote: "They'd just finished their Caesar salads, and she was in the middle of dipping a hunk of crusty Italian bread in seasoned olive oil, when her companion brought up the one name guaranteed to kill her appetite."
quote: "He stared at her expectantly, his sheep's clothing beginning to slip, but Olivia was busy sorting through her real feelings for a socially acceptable response."
quote: "\"Well,\" she hedged, \"if there's one thing I've learned from my listeners, it's that there's no accounting for what women find attractive in men.\""
quote: "Unfortunately, only a blind woman could get away with calling Matt Ransom unattractive. Olivia tried not to squirm as her brain reached into its memory banks to replay her first glimpse of Matt years ago at WZNA. Then, as now, he was movie star handsome. In fact, he bore an uncanny resemblance to the actor George Clooney. Though taller and broader, Ransom possessed the same close-cropped dark hair going gray at the temples, the same brown eyes under thick dark brows, and the same sort of perfectly chiseled features over a square-cut jaw."
quote: "Personally, Olivia found him too good-looking, too argumentative, too egotistical . . . too . . . everything. Eight years ago in Chicago he'd ground every one of her romantic illusions into dust, but this hardly seemed the time or place to say so. \"I didn't say that.\""
quote: "\"Do you think he deserves the title 'Bachelor of the Year'?\""
quote: "Olivia took a sip of water and swallowed. Matt Ransom was thirty-six going on twenty and wouldn't recognize a committed relationship if it bit him on the . . ."
quote: "Olivia looked up, caught the feral gleam in the reporter's eye, and knew how Little Red Riding Hood must have felt."
quote: "\"I honestly can't think of anyone who deserves the title more. Mr. Ransom brings a whole new meaning to the definition of bachelorhood.\""
quote: "\"And the sniping on air and in interviews? What's the problem with you two?\""
quote: "Olivia managed a smile. \"Just a little on-air hijinks. Mr. Ransom's show draws a large male audience; mine is predominantly female. Sometimes there's some . . . banter. It doesn't mean anything.\""
quote: "The reporter grinned and gleefully shed the last stitch of sheep's clothing. \"So you weren't bothered by the article in which he referred to you as\"—the wolf actually looked down to check his notes—\" 'an insurgent in the war between the sexes'?\""
quote: "Olivia slipped a last crust of bread into her mouth and tried not to choke on it. She chewed carefully for a moment before speaking. \"Well, I was somewhat surprised that Ransom acknowledged there was a war on when his side is losing so badly. I'm even more surprised that a man who admits to frequenting bars named after female body parts knows what the word 'insurgent' means.\""
quote: "Olivia felt her jaw drop at this latest affront. She covered by dabbing at the corner of her mouth with her napkin and reminding herself that some questions didn't deserve answers. Since signing on at WTLK ten months ago, she'd been very careful to keep her interaction with Matt purely professional, but the Bachelor of the Year obviously felt no such compunction."
quote: "\"Do you have a rebuttal for Mr. Ransom or his listeners?\""
quote: "Olivia continued chewing her food carefully and forced herself to think. Not too long ago, a reporter had asked her to sum up a woman's greatest obstacle to happiness in five words or less, and she'd made headlines by doing it in one. \"Men,\" she'd said."
quote: "Then she'd rethought her answer and added the word \"sex.\" Those two subjects, and her willingness to tackle them on the air, had sent her ratings soaring."
quote: "Olivia had no intention of being railroaded into making a remark she'd regret. Nor did she intend to let Matt Ransom destroy her again—personally or professionally. If she kept her head, she could come out of this interview with her dignity intact and maybe even an advantage in the coming battle."
quote: "Olivia set her napkin on the table and pushed her plate gently away. She met the wolf's eyes and raised a queenly eyebrow in return, speaking clearly and calmly for the benefit of the small tape recorder sitting on the table between them."
quote: "\"While I have great respect for Mr. Ransom's show— what little I've heard of it—if he ever decides to tackle weightier subjects like real life and relationships, I might be able to help him out.\""
quote: "The wolf's fangs disappeared into a pleased smile. He stopped eating, picked up his notepad, and started scribbling."
quote: "Olivia knew when to make an exit. Slipping her purse over her shoulder, she thanked her host for lunch, slid her chair back from the table, and stood. Pausing with her hands on the back of the chair, she nodded toward the notebook and tape recorder and flashed her best smile. \"I do hope you'll feel free to quote me on that.\""
quote: "Switching his microphone off, Matt Ransom leaned back in his chair, put his long legs up on the table in front of him, and clasped his hands behind his head to wait out the five-minute commercial break. With just an hour to go before midnight, the station was close to empty, which made it just the way he liked it."
quote: "Two minutes later, he tossed a Nerf ball at the basketball hoop duct-taped to the wall and smiled when it swished through. He shot the next one left-handed, the one after that with his eyes closed."
quote: "Satisfied, he reached for the mug of lukewarm coffee more from force of habit than from a need for caffeine. He was a night owl, always had been, and preferred working late, when things were looser and less structured."
quote: "At one minute until air, he made a few notes about a topic for next Monday's show and let his thoughts wander to the previous night's program. He'd begun by posing the question, \"Why can't men and women share a TV remote?\" planning to segue into a discussion of the elemental differences between males and females, a topic custom-made for his particular brand of humor."
quote: "Instead, the show had digressed into a trashing of couples' counseling, which had led to another caller's caustic evaluation of therapy in general, which had ultimately led to the topic of WTLK's very own Dr. Olivia Moore."
quote: "Even he, who normally had no problem following the flow, had been a little surprised at how quickly her name had come up and how strongly his callers, mostly male, felt about her. In loud voices they objected to her pro-female stance and the male bashing that often accompanied it, but they couldn't seem to stop talking about her."
quote: "He was fairly certain he wasn't the one responsible for bringing up Olivia's sex life, or the imagined lack of one. But once the subject was raised, he'd had a devil of a time getting off it. He winced as he remembered the jokes and innuendo."
quote: "Almost as bad as his callers' fixation with the earnest Dr. Moore was the way they kept trying to get him to rehash and counter her advice. Hell, even if he had the least bit of respect for or belief in counseling, he had no interest in providing it to his listeners. He was in the entertainment business, and his show was designed for mental stimulation—not rehabilitation."
quote: "Matt recognized the deep drawl of one of his regular callers, a long-haul trucker who'd picked up his lifelong nickname as a linebacker for the University of Georgia Bulldogs. \"Hi, Dawg. How ya doin'?\""
quote: "\"Not so great. My girlfriend, JoBeth, wants to get married.\""
quote: "\"I'm sorry, man, but I've got to talk to somebody.\""
quote: "\"Can't we talk about football? Or maybe the relative merits of owning versus leasing a vehicle?\""
quote: "\"I need some help here, Matt. JoBeth's been listening to that Dr. Olivia. I need somebody on my side.\""
quote: "Matt looked to his producer, Ben, for assistance, but the coward refused to look him in the eye. A check of his monitor showed only one caller waiting. There wasn't a commercial break in sight."
quote: "\"All right, all right. What seems to be the problem?\""
quote: "\"Well, I don't think there is a problem. But JoBeth keeps going on about her biological clock. Says it's time to settle down and start a family.\""
quote: "\"Why don't you just tell her you need some time? I'm sure she doesn't want to rush into anything. How long have you been dating?\""
quote: "\"Three years? Good Lord. How long does it take to figure out whether you want to be with somebody?\""
quote: "Dawg snorted. \"Not exactly settling down and making any life-altering commitments yourself, are you?\""
quote: "\"How come your girlfriends aren't calling in on that show to complain?\""
quote: "\"Because I don't give them anything to complain about. I'm honest. I tell them right up front what they can expect, namely a good time, but I don't pretend I'm offering anything more than that.\""
quote: "\"Well, it's a little late for that now. JoBeth's a fine woman and all, but I'm just not ready to do the marriage thing again.\""
quote: "\"I hear you, Dawg. But I'll tell you, it's a whole lot easier to say that up front instead of later in self-defense. You've put yourself in the middle of a classic no-win situation. Whatever you do now, you're pretty much screwed.\""
quote: "Matt terminated the call and glanced at the clock, relieved to discover it was almost time for a commercial break. He took one of the holding calls, listened to some more less-than-macho whimpering, and dumped the rest, signaling Ben he was ready to move on."
quote: "This was what came of telling men they were supposed to have a sensitive side; it made them wimpy. He didn't like it one bit."
quote: "At the all-clear signal, Matt stood, removed his headphones, and headed out of the studio. He made it past the control room, down the corridor, and through the security door before slowing down. The last two days were enough to spoil a man's good time. First, T.J. had to go and share his budget dilemma with him, and now his audience was trying to turn him into some kind of Donahue. Sheesh."
quote: "As far as Matt was concerned, the best relationships were every bit as uncomplicated as he'd said. Two people got together, they enjoyed each other's company, and they moved on when it stopped being fun. If you didn't get too close, no one got too hurt. He'd been living that philosophy successfully all his adult life, with the exception of one long-ago assault on his heartstrings, and he saw no reason to reconsider that philosophy now."
quote: "He stopped in front of a publicity photo someone had tacked up on the bulletin board and studied Olivia Moore, Ph.D. Funny how completely she'd managed to intrude into his life, once again. Not only was her show beginning to change the face of his own, but according to T.J., Olivia was now the competition. One of their shows could go."
quote: "He narrowed his gaze and contemplated the likeness more closely. She'd grown sleeker, more sophisticated, but physically Olivia hadn't changed much since Chicago. Her cheekbones still angled dramatically upward on either side of the straight, slightly pointed nose, while her lips remained too full for the determined chin underneath. Her silky blonde hair fell straight to the shoulder like it always had, and her wide-set green eyes continued to glitter with wicked intelligence."
quote: "Matt poured himself a last cup of hours-old coffee, zapped it back to life in the microwave, and headed toward the control room, his mind full of Olivia. When the time came for T.J. to make his choice, he'd be strangely sorry to see her go."
quote: "JoBeth Namey sorted through the basket of dirty clothes on the laundry room floor. Spinning the washer's control knob, she started a stream of hot water and propped up the lid of the machine. Then she added a cup of liquid detergent and watched the water turn sudsy before feeding the contents of the basket into the washer one article at a time."
quote: "Dawg's T-shirts were as industrial-sized as the man who wore them, and so were his jockey shorts. JoBeth dangled a pair of white cotton briefs above the soapy water, blushing as she remembered how urgently she'd tugged them off him the night before. A sigh escaped her at the memory of his lovemaking and the contentment she'd felt cradled in his arms afterward—a contentment that had disintegrated when she awoke to overhear him discussing her on the air with Matt Ransom."
quote: "JoBeth felt a fresh wave of humiliation and an equally unwelcome pang of despair. Earl Wayne Rollins II was not the first man she'd ever had a relationship with, but she'd assumed he'd be the last. She loved him, that was the hard, cold truth of it, and he kept saying he loved her. But the ticking of her biological clock had begun to drown out those words of love."
quote: "She wanted . . . Lord, she wanted children and a family of her own. Not the empty keeping-up-appearances sort she'd grown up in, but the real thing fueled by real feelings and emotional commitment. Being forced to lobby for a marriage proposal made her feel like an article of clothing destined for the clearance rack—not worth the original, retail price."
quote: "JoBeth dropped the lid on the washer and bent to pull a load of blue jeans out of the dryer."
quote: "Silently she pulled clothes out of the dryer and folded each one in turn, carefully separating hers and Dawg's into neatly stacked piles."
quote: "Dawg came up behind her and wrapped his arms around her. His touch, as always, was surprisingly gentle for such a big man. \"Mornin', sweetheart.\""
quote: "Normally she would have turned, gone up on tiptoe, and pressed her body up against the solid wall of Dawg Rollins's chest, but today she held herself stiff."
quote: "\"What's wrong?\" He nuzzled the back of her neck and locked his forearms together just under her collarbone. In a minute he'd be slipping his fingers under her pajama top and making her tingle all over again. \"We don't have anywhere we need to be just yet. Why don't you come on back to bed?\""
quote: "Holding her body rigid, she pulled away and turned to look up into the rugged angles of his face. He had a good ten inches on her and close to a hundred pounds, but she refused to feel small. Righteous indignation bubbled in her veins, and she enjoyed his start of surprise when she placed a hand in the center of his chest and pushed him back a step."
quote: "\"You have got more nerve than the whole state of Texas.\""
quote: "Golden-gray stubble covered Dawg's cheeks, and his blue eyes shone with good humor. He actually smiled."
quote: "\"You went on the radio last night and told the whole of Atlanta that you don't want to marry me.\""
quote: "\"That was a rhetorical question, Dawg. You are not supposed to answer.\""
quote: "\"I'm in love with you. And you keep saying you're in love with me.\""
quote: "\"No.\" She pointed a finger at him, cautioning him not to speak. \"Don't you dare say it right now. I'm tired of hearing words that go nowhere.\""
quote: "\"I'm forty-one, Dawg. I can't keep hanging around while you think this through. Who knows how many good eggs I have left?\""
quote: "Dawg opened his mouth as if to speak, but now, when she yearned for a response, no words came out. They just faced each other in the overheated laundry room with the sounds of the washer and dryer underscoring the silence that stretched between them."
quote: "His blue eyes turned apologetic, and he looked almost as miserable as she felt. Realizing she was close to tears, she ducked under his arm and escaped upstairs. Yanking on a pair of jeans and a T-shirt, JoBeth swiped at her eyes and reflected on the irony of her situation. Four years ago she'd walked away from a marriage proposal because she couldn't settle for a man who didn't make her pulse pound or her heart race."
quote: "Now she had more pulse pounding and heart racing than she could shake a stick at, but it looked like it would take an act of God to convince the man she loved to marry her."
quote: "With her Monday morning show behind her, Olivia went in search of Matt. Braced for confrontation, she strode toward the production studio where Matt was recording commercials, determined to establish ground rules for the remainder of their time together at WTLK."
quote: "She'd been wrong not to acknowledge what had happened between them in Chicago. While she had no intention of making their past common knowledge, letting it simmer in silence between them had proven a bad idea. She hadn't realized how hard it would be to work with Matt again, but now that she knew, well, she'd just have to find a way to set things straight."
quote: "The glowing red light above the studio door indicated Matt's microphone was open, so she stopped outside and studied her nemesis through the rectangle of glass."
quote: "As she watched, he leaned forward in to the microphone, his attention split between the typewritten copy and the digital timer beside it, and read the copy aloud. His body language declared him both focused and relaxed. Olivia was neither, because even through the wall of a sealed room, Matt Ransom still had the power to unnerve her."
quote: "She'd been a twenty-one-year-old intern when WZNA's sexy afternoon disc jockey had singled her out. He'd been worldly; she'd been painfully inexperienced. He'd offered a good time; she'd fallen completely and embarrassingly in love. And if she'd been ill prepared for the advent of their relationship, she'd been even less equipped to handle its sudden end."
quote: "Her experience with Matt had marked and changed her. Never again did she give herself so freely or trust so blindly. Even her choice of husband could be traced to the lessons she'd learned from Matt."
quote: "Now, eight years later, it was hard to fathom how she could have fallen so deeply for a man she'd barely known. It was even harder to understand why a part of her still wanted to believe there was more to Matt Ransom than a sexy smile and easy charm."
quote: "Watching him work, she told herself that she felt only disdain for a man who plowed through women like a farmer did a field, but she could still remember every detail of his lovemaking. Just as she remembered what it felt like to have the full force of his personality focused solely on her."
quote: "The red light flashed off, and Olivia reached for the doorknob. Quickly, before she could lose her nerve, she turned it and opened the door."
quote: "Matt looked up from the audio board and stood, his face reflecting his surprise. \"Hello, Livvy.\""
quote: "The use of his old nickname for her stopped her cold. It took several long seconds to recover and an enormous amount of will not to drop her gaze. Stepping forward, she pulled the door shut behind her, trying not to notice how small the space was and how completely he filled it. \"I want to talk about what's going on between us.\""
quote: "\"Between us? Have I missed something?\" He smiled, and his brown eyes went warm. \"No, I'd definitely know if there was something between us.\""
quote: "She felt the heat steal up her neck to warm her cheeks and fought the urge to fall back a step."
quote: "\"It's amazing, given what you do for a living, Olivia, but talking about sex still makes you blush.\" He didn't wait for a reply. \"We were talking about sex, weren't we?\""
quote: "Raising her chin, she said, \"Until T.J. clarifies our situation, we need to strive for a little professionalism. You remember what that is, don't you?\""
quote: "\"Remember it? I taught it to you. Along with quite a few other things.\""
quote: "Olivia flushed at the blatant reminder. She opened her mouth to respond, but had to swallow her retort when a knock sounded on the door. She turned as the door swung outward to reveal a very young, very beautiful female."
quote: "\"Hope I'm not interrupting.\" The girl's gaze swept over Olivia. \"You promised me lunch, Matt. Are you almost done?\""
quote: "\"Olivia, this is Cherie. She just started in the sales department. Cherie, Dr. Olivia Moore.\""
quote: "Cherie's face glowed with obvious adoration. For Matt. \"It's a pleasure to meet you, Dr. O. I'm a big fan.\" The girl's respectful tone placed Olivia squarely in the ancient-crone-not-to-be-considered-competition category—not a place a woman approaching thirty wanted to be."
quote: "Olivia forced a smile. \"Thank you, Cherie, it's a pleasure to meet you, too. But I'm not quite finished with Matt yet.\" Assuring herself she had not just made a Freudian slip, Olivia waited for the young woman to duck back out the door. Then she turned to face Matt again, fortified by the knowledge that Matt, like her father, would always be surrounded by Cheries."
quote: "She straightened to her full height. Matt Ransom was nothing more than a colleague—and according to T.J., a temporary one. All she required from him was professional courtesy and a little respect. \"I expect you to stop making fun of me on the air. And I also expect you to keep your callers in line. I don't appreciate being held up to ridicule, even on that free-for-all you call a radio show.\""
quote: "The glint of amusement disappeared from Matt's eyes. \"Well, you'd be a less tempting target if you didn't take yourself so damned seriously.\""
quote: "\"It's just radio, Olivia. Not brain surgery. And no matter what you want to tell yourself, it's all about entertainment and ratings.\""
quote: "\"That's no excuse for your behavior.\" Belatedly she realized that her gaze had strayed to the young woman waiting on the other side of the plate glass."
quote: "Matt followed Olivia's gaze. \"Are you referring to my show or to what you assume to be my sex life? As I recall, at one time you had no problem with either.\""
quote: "The reminder carried the force of a slap. What a mistake it had been to try to reason with him. \"I don't give a fig about your sex life. I'm not one of your groupies anymore, Matt. And I don't think every word that spills out of your mouth is gospel. I just can't believe you're still living in Never Land. Isn't it about time for you to grow up?\""
quote: "He clutched at his chest, his tone still mocking, but there was something unreadable in his dark eyes. \"Ah, Olivia. You wound me.\""
quote: "With that, she turned and walked carefully out of the studio, past the waiting Cherie and down the hallway, her brain already searching for a weapon capable of blowing a hole in Matt Ransom's massive ego."
quote: "She caught Diane's surprised glance and gave her a thumbs-up. Butterflies threw themselves against the walls of her stomach, but she didn't let them deter her."
quote: "Diane took the first call as Olivia explained. \"The Peter Pan Syndrome refers to the problem many men have growing up. Like the mythical Peter, they want to fly through life without ever having to accept adult responsibility.\""
quote: "Olivia smiled. \"I'll describe typical Peter Pan behavior, and you let me know if you know anyone like that. I'm especially interested in hearing how this kind of behavior has affected your life.\""
quote: "Olivia glanced down at her notes, though she didn't need them. She could describe this man in her sleep."
quote: "\"He's attractive, lots of fun, and knows how to show a woman a good time. He's probably a serial dater, staying with one woman until she starts making noises about commitment. Chances are he's got it down to a science. You know, that whole 'just let them know what to expect up front' business that he uses to rationalize his inability to sustain a long-term relationship. Bottom line, this guy has plenty going for him—unless you're interested in 'happily ever after.'"
quote: "\"When someone wants to discuss real feelings, he looks for a less threatening topic.\" She paused for emphasis. \"Like football or car leasing versus buying. The last thing he wants is a serious discussion about anything personal.\""
quote: "Olivia caught Diane's eye through the rectangle of glass, and the two women shared a smile as Olivia took her first call."
quote: "\"Oh, yeah. I've been living with one. Dawg, that's my boyfriend, he qualifies big time. And so does his hero, Matt Ransom.\""
quote: "Olivia couldn't believe her luck. She hadn't expected to hit pay dirt so quickly."
quote: "\"Matt Ransom, really?\" She tried to sound surprised, but didn't think she was that great an actress. \"What makes you think your boyfriend and Matt Ransom are Peter Pans?\" She felt a twinge of guilt at letting her caller do the dirty work."
quote: "\"Well, Dawg thinks Ransom walks on water. Especially since Matt got named Bachelor of the Year for about the hundredth time. Whenever I see a picture of him in the paper, he's with a different woman, and I don't think I've ever heard so much as a rumor about him settling down. Does that qualify him?\""
quote: "\"I just don't understand it. Dawg and I have so much in common. I thought we wanted the same things. But when I told him I wanted to get married, he looked at me like I'd just told him I had the plague or something. Why would he react that way, Dr. O?\""
quote: "She was going to have to put this woman on the payroll. \"Well, JoBeth, according to Kiley, it's all about fear. These men feel inadequate\"—she enunciated the word carefully—\"and they are deathly afraid of little old us and having to grow up. I'm going to take a few more calls, and then we'll discuss how to deal with these Peters.\""
quote: "\"Is it going to require bashing and throwing them back? I'm not sure I could do that to Dawg.\""
quote: "\"Don't you worry about Dawg, JoBeth. We're going to try a little tough love on that boy. But first let's see what some of our other callers have to say.\""
quote: "In conclusion, she offered some additional insight into the syndrome and invited anyone with serious concerns to log on to her website to see Kiley's original questionnaire."
quote: "To be fair, she doubted Matt, with the level of success he'd achieved, would fit Kiley's profile, but she didn't feel compelled to share that opinion with her listeners."
quote: "As promised, during the last few minutes of the show, Diane got JoBeth back on the line. Olivia imagined both Dawg and his hero would take exception to the advice she offered."
quote: "\"JoBeth, not knowing the reasons behind your boyfriend's unwillingness to commit, I can only make suggestions based on his behavior. If you love Dawg and want to marry him, then you need to make him understand that his refusal to marry you could cause him to lose you. It's not a threat or an ultimatum, though I imagine he'll call it that. It's exercising your rights and standing up for yourself. If you want a committed relationship and he doesn't, then you owe it to yourself to get back out there where you can meet someone who does. If he refuses to set a date, move out.\""
quote: "\"Yes, and for God's sake stop having sex with him.\""
quote: "Olivia caught the startled expression on Diane's face and winked. \"We're talking no more free milk, JoBeth. Not a drop.\""
quote: "Olivia glanced up at the digital clock, amazed at how quickly the morning had gone. She felt incredibly good, as if a weight had been lifted from her shoulders."
quote: "\"Thanks to everyone who shared their Peter Pan stories. It's time to ask for and receive what you want, ladies; making yourself happy is no fairy tale. JoBeth, let me know what happens with Dawg. I'll be looking forward to hearing from you.\""
quote: "The theme music sounded especially sweet in her ears today. As it built and flared, she smiled once again and bid her audience farewell."
quote: "Matt signed on Tuesday night determined to avoid advice-giving at all costs. He planned to do what he did best—rouse the guys, shock a little bit, encourage spirited discussion. He'd already wasted more time than he'd meant to thinking about Olivia Moore. He wasn't going to let her infringe on his show, too. At least that's what he believed until he took his first call."
quote: "\"Is this the unable-to-commit-or-grow-up Peter Pan? The one currently residing in Never Land?\""
quote: "The next few calls went much the same, but no one really offered answers until Dawg called in. \"Hi, Matt. Rough day, huh?\""
quote: "\"Not until recently. What's going on, Dawg? I seem to be the last to know.\""
quote: "\"JoBeth described me. She used my name and everything—I heard part of it on my run to Montgomery— and then she left a message on my cell phone saying that if I wanted any more milk I was going to have to buy the cow. Danged if I know what she meant by that.\""
quote: "\"And mean, too. You shoulda heard some of the things they said about you.\""
quote: "Matt teetered between anger and amusement. On the one hand, he didn't particularly relish being likened to a cartoon character like Peter Pan. On the other, what in the world had gotten into prim and proper, play-by-the-rules Olivia Moore? He could hardly wait to listen to the tape of her show. There was nothing like a worthy adversary to make the game more interesting."
quote: "A week later the score was tied and bets were being placed on the winner. Though few at the station thought she'd topped her Peter Pan program, it was generally acknowledged that Olivia had shed her white gloves and had a good shot at the title."
quote: "Matt had gotten in a few licks of his own, including a show devoted to the kinds of hang-ups that drove people into the counseling profession. Far from scientific, it had digressed into a comedic free-for-all that left callers stacked up waiting to go on the air."
quote: "When all eyes were on them, he nodded amiably, scooted his chair even closer, and took her hand in his. \"I don't believe we've been introduced. The name is Peter. But you can call me Pan. And you would be . . . Wendy? . . . Tinker Bell?\" He flashed a smile that managed to be both brazen and boyish."
quote: "Embarrassed, Olivia tried to pull her hand free. When that didn't work, she forced an equally cocky smile to her lips. \"Nope, just a concerned mental health professional trying to help the lost boys find their way home.\""
quote: "He smiled appreciatively and turned her hand over, examining it closely. \"No hook, I see, though I detect a few claws.\" He bent down to kiss her palm like a courtier of old, and whispered so only she could hear, \"You can take me home anytime.\""
quote: "His lips were warm and intimate against her skin. Olivia gave up on subtlety and set about retrieving her hand one digit at a time. Once free, she turned her attention to the Operations Manager, who looked surprisingly happy for someone experiencing a budget crisis."
quote: "\"Okay,\" T.J. said. \"Now that we all have our hands to ourselves, we can get started.\" He cleared his throat and leaned forward. \"As you all know, we've had the company consultant down from Detroit looking at audience reaction to both of your shows.\""
quote: "Everyone groaned. But as T.J. continued, the reason for his good humor became evident. In radio, as in television, the larger the audience, the more the station could charge for both commercial time and the right for other stations to air their programs. \"We won't have the total picture until we get the final book at the end of the ratings period, but from what we can determine, your little 'squabble' is already having a measurable impact.\""
quote: "T.J. smoothed a hand over his bald head. \"Every time you talk about each other on the air, your approval ratings shoot up.\""
quote: "\"Oh, great,\" Olivia said. \"Why don't I just examine one of Matt's psychological issues on every show? He's bound to have enough of them to fill a couple years' worth of programming.\""
quote: "\"Look who's talking.\" Matt's snort of laughter was less than flattering. \"Listening to my audience rant about you hasn't been any picnic, either. For somebody who's supposed to help others, you've got quite a few peculiarities of your own. Not,\" he added hastily, \"that I have any interest in taking up any more time talking about them on my show.\""
quote: "\"Children, children, save it for on air.\" T.J. sat back in his chair and studied Matt and Olivia. \"I mean that literally.\""
quote: "Matt shook his head in disgust. \"Oh, right. What are you going to do, put us on the air and let us duke it out? We're not trained animals, T.J. I, for one, am not willing to spar with Olivia on cue.\""
quote: "\"No?\" T.J. continued to study them carefully. \"That's too bad, because our promotions department has come up with a way to capitalize on your little 'feud' and do some good for the community at the same time.\""
quote: "Matt lounged in the chair beside her, but his negligent pose was at odds with the waves of energy rolling off him. For once they were in accord. She, too, had a bad feeling about the direction of this conversation."
quote: "T.J. turned to the Promotion Director, newly acquired from a sister station in Boston. \"Charles, why don't you fill everyone in.\""
quote: "Charles Crankower ran his elegant fingers through his perfectly styled blond hair. In an environment known for its informality, he was painfully pressed and stiffly correct. Those who didn't care for him—and their number was growing—expended considerable energy trying to spot the stick they claimed must be stuck up his butt. So far, no one had managed to locate or extract it."
quote: "\"Actually, the idea is stunningly simple, yet complex.\" Charles crossed one knife-edged trouser leg over the other and steepled manicured fingers on the table in front of him. His voice was a rich baritone, the accent cultured."
quote: "\"As you probably know, the Muscular Dystrophy Association conducts a 'jail and bail' fund-raiser each year.\""
quote: "They all nodded warily, trying to figure out where Charles was headed."
quote: "\"Well, the Third Harvest Food Bank approached us about attempting something similar, though the bail would be paid in food rather than monetary donations. They need help replenishing their pantries.\""
quote: "\"So they want to pretend to lock us up somewhere and have our listeners donate food to get us out?\" Matt's tone was clearly skeptical. \"I don't see how this ties in to what's happening with Olivia and me.\""
quote: "\"Yes, well, we've come up with a slightly different twist.\" He unsteepled his fingers, rested his elbows on the conference table, and smiled. It was the most animated Olivia had ever seen him, and she didn't care for it one bit."
quote: "\"Wins what?\" Matt's tone was dry as the Sahara."
quote: "Charles shifted carefully in his seat, but he didn't falter. \"T.J. will address that in just a moment, but the ultimate prize, of course, is increased exposure and enhanced ratings.\""
quote: "There was a long silence before Charles pressed on. \"Given your audiences, we assume donations will fall along gender lines. In essence, we expect a true battle between the sexes.\" Charles smiled and bowed his head slightly, as if expecting applause."
quote: "\"You're kidding, right?\" Matt shifted his gaze from Charles to T.J., barely sparing a glance for Olivia."
quote: "\"Let me see if I've got this right. You want to lock us up for a week and see who's still standing at the end?\" Matt's tone still smacked of disbelief, but as Olivia watched, a glint of mischief stole into his dark eyes, lightening them considerably. \"I assume we can't vote each other out?\""
quote: "T.J. laughed. \"No, no voting out. No eating of rats. The apartment will be completely equipped with all the creature comforts. In fact, your sponsors are already vying with each other to stock the place with their products. It's an incredible promotional opportunity.\""
quote: "Olivia finally found her voice. \"You spoke to sponsors before you talked to us?\""
quote: "Charles swallowed, but held his ground. \"We wanted to see whether the idea would fly before we bothered you with the details.\" He smiled again. By Crankower standards, the man was positively glowing. \"Virtually everyone's on board. They absolutely love this idea.\""
quote: "\"That's because no one is suggesting they spend a week with this character.\" She shoved a thumb in Matt's direction. \"I'm not going to do this, T.J. I'm not going to be stuck in a confined space with a maniac for a week while a national audience watches through a—a peep-hole. Torture is illegal in this country.\""
quote: "Matt grinned. \"You're hurting my feelings, Olivia. Just think how much quality time we'd have together. Why, we could really get to know each other.\""
quote: "\"I don't want to know you better. I'm sorry I know you as well as I do.\""
quote: "\"You just keep slinging those arrows, don't you? I hate to sound immodest, Olivia, but there are women who would kill for the opportunity you're being offered. Unless, of course, you're afraid to be alone with me?\""
quote: "\"Afraid of you?\" She was terrified, but not of him. \"Don't flatter yourself. I just think it's stupid.\" Olivia turned to Diane for support, but her producer shrugged apologetically."
quote: "\"I hate to say this, Olivia, but it really is a great idea. You saw what happened with the Peter Pan thing. We're looking at a huge ratings kiss here, and major press coverage.\""
quote: "Matt's producer agreed. \"It's a win-win situation. The food bank gets food and publicity, you both get big numbers—everybody wins. All you have to do is put on a bit of a show. Tangle with each other a little.\" Ben grinned. \"That shouldn't be a problem for you two.\""
quote: "Diane scribbled a few notes and then addressed Charles. \"There will be some private areas not covered by the camera, right?\""
quote: "\"Yes.\" Charles pulled out a floor plan of one of the smallest apartments Olivia had ever seen. \"The two bedrooms and the bathroom are unwired, though the hall between them will be visible. So, if either one of them feels the urge to kill, there's a place to retreat and cool down. Obviously, though, we're counting on a certain amount of hostility.\""
quote: "\"Hostility is not a problem. But I'd rather donate the money than go through this ridiculous charade.\" There was too much history here, and too much old heartache. Olivia shuddered at the idea of being trapped for a week with a man she couldn't stand . . . and wasn't sure she could resist. The fact that she'd turn thirty during the week they'd earmarked for the promotion smacked of cruel and unusual punishment."
quote: "She studied Matt's profile, strong and sure, and thought about how easily he unnerved her. Her gaze settled on his cocky grin, and every synapse in her brain screamed out a warning. \"I'm sorry, T.J., but I just can't see myself doing this.\""
quote: "T.J. looked Olivia straight in the eye, his gaze never wavering. \"You're perfectly free to say no to this, Olivia. I wouldn't dream of forcing you to be a part of the promotion.\""
quote: "Olivia's sigh of relief died on her lips as T.J. continued. \"Of course, if you don't participate, Matt will end up with his own weeklong remote.\""
quote: "Olivia silently weighed her options. Letting Matt gain a promotional advantage seemed a lot smarter than spending a week alone with him in a sardine-sized apartment. But then, almost anything would be smarter than that. Unfortunately, T.J. didn't seem to be finished with her yet. He said, \"And of course I'm planning to use this remote to help me make my decision between your shows. The favorite-host vote and food donations will be the most visible popularity indicators, but corporate's a lot more interested in audience attitudes.\""
quote: "The pause that followed was so pregnant Olivia feared it might be carrying twins."
quote: "\"The consultant's coming back during the remote to conduct a series of focus groups and a targeted phone survey to get a better handle on how our listeners really feel about the two of you. First he'll measure P1 response—the listeners who already consider WTLK their preferred station. But then, and this is key, he'll be taking a thorough measurement of P2's—the listeners who consider us their secondary choice. Converting them to P1's is a very big deal.\""
quote: "It sounded like a bad game of bingo, but Olivia understood that audience preference was what it all came down to."
quote: "\"At the end of the week,\" T.J. concluded, \"I should have what I need to make an informed decision. If you're not in on the remote, it's going to be a very uneven playing field.\""
quote: "Olivia sat back in her chair, stunned and silent, listening to the excited chatter around her. She felt Matt's gaze on her and turned in her seat to face him. As usual, his eyes were too warm and his smile too knowing."
quote: "Agreeing to Charles's scheme would be a mistake of epic proportions. If she were half as assertive as she advised her listeners to be, she'd stand up and commit harikari before she allowed herself to consider a promotion as outlandish as the one Charles had just put before them."
quote: "Matt leaned in closer, and the blood whooshed through her veins with the force of a tsunami. The sooner she said no, the better."
quote: "Does it feel cold in here to you?\" Olivia stood inside the doorway of the apartment, trying not to hear the front door click shut behind her. Or the dead bolt slamming into place. Or Crankower's footsteps echoing down the empty hallway toward that final elevator ride to freedom."
quote: "She reached for the thermostat and adjusted the dial, even though she knew the chill cutting through her had little to do with the temperature and everything to do with the panic that gripped her."
quote: "Taking an exploratory step into the room, Olivia set her suitcase on the floor and let her gaze wander around the living area. What she saw did nothing to calm her nerves."
quote: "To the left was an upside-down U of a kitchen in varying shades of beige. Its eat-in counter jutted back toward the front door, and a wooden dinette set sat next to it. A postage-stamp window above the sink admitted a dollop of daylight."
quote: "Straight ahead of the entryway, a gap in the apartment's longest wall led to the bedrooms and bath. To the right of the gap, two nubby brown sofas formed an L around a mission-style cocktail table and faced a bulging entertainment armoire on top of which perched the eyeball-shaped camera that would document their every move."
quote: "Glimmers of daylight teased through French doors set into the far wall, and next to them stood a portable punching bag with a caricature of Matt's face emblazoned on it."
quote: "Squeezed in between the front door and the armoire, a desk with computer, audio mixer, and telephone had been set up as a temporary audio console. Matt leaned across her to punch a series of keys on the computer, and seconds later, everything in the camera's path appeared on both the computer monitor and the television screen."
quote: "\"Smile, Olivia. It's show time.\" Matt's mouth brushed against her ear, and his warm breath tickled her neck."
quote: "Determined to ignore him, Olivia peered at the television screen. She could see herself and Matt in the foreground with the kitchen and bedroom area behind them, but because of the wide angle required to cover the whole space, subtle movement and fine detail were lost. As a test, she raised one hand and waggled all five fingers at the camera. A glance at the monitor confirmed what she'd hoped—though the raised hand was obvious, what it was doing was not."
quote: "The lack of audio was another blessing. Since sound would only be broadcast during their shows, they wouldn't have to guard their words as closely as their actions. Olivia took a step back from Matt. \"I'm going to put my things away. Do you have a bedroom preference?\""
quote: "Matt's lips parted in a grin, and Olivia realized she did, in fact, need to choose her words with care. \"Let me re-phrase that. Do you care which bedroom you sleep in?\""
quote: "\"Never mind.\" Olivia picked up her suitcase and strode across the room to the first door on the left. \"I'll take this one.\" Then she sailed through the bedroom door."
quote: "The bedroom, like the rest of the apartment, had a certain minimalist quality. Which was to say it was small and sparsely furnished. After laying her suitcase on a luggage stand she found in the closet, she sat on the edge of the queen-size bed and contemplated the Victoria's Secret bag that someone had placed in its center. Fifteen minutes alone with Matt and she was tripping over her tongue; adding lingerie to the equation seemed decidedly . . . stupid."
quote: "Wary, she reached into the bright pink tissue paper and pulled out the skimpiest black satin nightgown she'd ever seen. Feather light and boasting more slits than satin, it came with an equally skimpy thong. She had just lifted the tiny triangle of material gingerly between two fingers when she heard Matt's voice coming from the doorway."
quote: "\"Olivia . . .\" Whatever Matt had been planning to say died on his lips at the sight of the thong dangling from her fingertips."
quote: "She crammed the slip of satin back into the bag, and turned to face him."
quote: "\"You seem to have picked the right room,\" he said."
quote: "Olivia refused to show any embarrassment. \"What, no goodies in yours?\" she asked."
quote: "\"I got cologne and green plaid pajamas.\" He leaned nonchalantly against the doorjamb. \"The sponsor was planning to send you a matching pair, but I told them you belonged in black satin . . . or nothing at all. Looks like they sent the best of both.\" His gaze swept over her body. \"Too bad you don't have the nerve to wear the black number on the air.\""
quote: "\"I didn't build my career strutting around in black satin.\""
quote: "\"A real shame. You could score two, maybe three rating points with the thong, Olivia, and I don't think I could bring myself to object.\""
quote: "\"Very sporting of you. But I have every intention of beating you with all my clothes on.\" She opened the nightstand drawer and shoved the pink and white bag inside. \"In my experience, most people prefer their therapists dressed.\""
quote: "One dark eyebrow sketched upward. \"Yeah. Don't ya just hate those naked counseling sessions? So hard to maintain eye contact.\""
quote: "Unable to stop herself, Olivia laughed out loud. She'd forgotten how on target Matt's humor could be. And how handsome he was when his smile leaped up and lit his eyes. Her laughter faded and she fell silent under his regard. It was time to get out of this room and back on a professional footing. Now. She rose and walked toward him."
quote: "Matt didn't move when she stopped just inches from where he stood. Instead, he looked down at her with eyes that were frankly assessing."
quote: "Still he didn't budge. Olivia's pulse rate kicked up. It was impossible not to be aware of his broad shoulders brushing the doorjamb, and his muscled chest pulling the black T-shirt taut. She resisted the urge to let her gaze drop lower, below the silver belt buckle and down the faded blue jeans that rode his slim hips."
quote: "If he was surprised at her tone, he didn't show it. \"You have,\" he glanced down at his watch, \"about ten minutes until you go on the air. Diane wants to set levels.\""
quote: "\"Oh.\" Less than thirty minutes in his company and she'd already forgotten why she was here. \"If you'll excuse me?\""
quote: "With a cocky bow he stepped back to allow her to pass."
quote: "Sitting down at the microphone, Olivia put on her headphones. \"I'm here, Di. Let me know when you've got what you need.\""
quote: "Matt still lounged in her bedroom doorway, coffee cup in hand, watching her with interest. Everything about this place was too close and too intimate, including Matt Ransom. Clearly, it would be up to her to maintain some distance between them."
quote: "\"Testing. Testing. This is Olivia Moore broadcasting live from the smallest apartment on Earth.\" She dragged her thoughts from Matt. \"How's the dieting, Di?\""
quote: "\"Great. I just switched to the All-the-Sushi-All-the-Time Diet. It's supposed to burn the fat right off you.\""
quote: "\"You know, I can help you with this food thing. These extreme diets are not—\""
quote: "\"Yeah, thanks, boss. But I really think this one will do it. I'm good for level. Do you need anything in there?\""
quote: "\"How about a new roommate and a couple thousand more square feet?\""
quote: "She glanced over at Matt, who still lounged in the bedroom doorway, and wondered who she was kidding. Real peace of mind would require more than Diane or additional square footage. A continent or two placed directly between her and Matt Ransom ought to do it."
quote: "Wandering into the kitchen, he rifled through cupboards and listened as Olivia advised her callers. A peek in the pantry confirmed that Crankower had delivered on their sponsors' promises. The pots and pans came from Williams-Sonoma, the produce from Diangelo's, the imported foods from Gourmet to Go. A case of his favorite wines sat on the counter waiting to be unpacked, and two six-packs of Newcastle were already chilling in the fridge. All in all, everything a man required for a civilized existence was on hand."
quote: "His roommate appeared to have simpler tastes. From what he could see, she intended to subsist on peanut butter and jelly sandwiches with occasional infusions of chocolate chip cookies. Her refrigerated goods consisted of two packages of processed American cheese food, a quart of skim milk, and a case of Diet Coke. If she'd requested anything remotely resembling a fruit or vegetable, he hadn't stumbled across it. In fact, for a doctor, she seemed woefully unconcerned with the basic corner-stones of good nutrition."
quote: "Matt walked back through the living area to observe Olivia more closely. When she bent over to retrieve a slip of paper, he couldn't help noticing how nicely she filled out her jeans. Her legs were long, her rear perfectly padded. As she settled back into her chair, his gaze traveled up the lean length of her to the high, full breasts that strained against the cream-colored T-shirt. If she was undernourished, she was hiding it beneath some pretty impressive curves."
quote: "Crossing to the seating area, Matt plopped down on the sofa and put his feet up on the cocktail table. It didn't take him long to decide that Olivia Moore was not deficient in vitamins or anything else that mattered. In fact, she was such fun to watch that he gave himself up to the pleasure of it."
quote: "Her white teeth tugged at her full bottom lip, and her green eyes radiated concern as she listened to a caller's problem. When she leaned forward to make a note on the pad in front of her, a curtain of blonde silk swirled over one slim shoulder and hid her features from view."
quote: "His pleasure was short-lived. Olivia's hands stilled and her voice sputtered out and died. Then she looked up and, for a full ten seconds, watched him watch her. When she finally spoke, it was to put her caller on hold for the commercial break. \"What in the world are you doing?\""
quote: "\"Who, me?\" He pointed a finger at his chest and checked the room as if looking for another culprit."
quote: "\"Of course you. Why are you sitting there? I'm in the middle of a show.\""
quote: "\"Where else would I be, Olivia? I've had too much coffee to take a nap, and I'm not about to spend three hours in the bathroom.\""
quote: "\"Well, you can't just sit there and watch me.\""
quote: "\"We have 850 square feet of living space. My options are limited. You're going to have to do better than that.\""
quote: "\"Then concentrate harder.\" He glanced up at the TV monitor and saw them squared off against each other. The Webcam might not broadcast their audio, but no one watching could miss the adversarial body language."
quote: "Olivia took off her headphones and stood. \"I'm not kidding, Matt. You cannot just sit there and stare at me while I'm working.\""
quote: "\"I said, you're on the air, Olivia.\" He pointed to his headphones. \"It's time to talk to those people who call in and ask you questions. You know . . . your listeners?\""
quote: "He gave her a wink, the raunchiest one he could come up with. \"If you don't get back to work, you're going to be trailing so far behind me by the end of the week that you'll have to wear that thong.\" Confident that he'd offered the perfect incentive, Matt raised the open magazine in front of his face once again."
quote: "How he managed to stifle his laughter and feign interest in the magazine for the remainder of her shift, he didn't know. Olivia pointedly ignored him, which he chose to interpret as an indication of her interest in him. But his musings were cut short by the tremulous tone of Olivia's final caller."
quote: "Matt's ears perked up. JoBeth was the name of Dawg's girlfriend."
quote: "\"Then what?\" Olivia's tone was calm and soothing, in stark contrast to JoBeth's quiet distress."
quote: "\"Then he wanted some, um, milk, and I told him he'd have to find himself another cow.\""
quote: "\"He said he didn't understand a word I was saying, and that if I didn't want to be with him, no one was forcing me to stay.\""
quote: "Matt turned a page of the magazine, but his attention was riveted on the drama being played out on the air."
quote: "Olivia waited out a long pause and then said, \"What did you do?\""
quote: "\"I moved out. I left him.\" JoBeth's voice vibrated with regret, and Matt took the opportunity to steal a glance over his magazine at Olivia. She sat very still, and the triumphant smile he'd expected to see on her face was absent."
quote: "\"I love him, Dr. O. I thought we'd be spending the rest of our lives together.\""
quote: "\"I know, JoBeth. Sometimes doing the right thing hurts.\" Olivia closed her eyes briefly, then opened them, her look momentarily far away. \"Now you just have to hang tough. And if that Dawg doesn't come through, then you'll go out and find someone who can appreciate you enough to commit. That's my best advice. You stay in touch. I want to know how it's going, okay?\""
quote: "Olivia removed her headphones, shoved her notes into a folder, and stood up. She knew just how JoBeth felt. It was hard to walk away from someone you loved, and even harder to walk away from someone you wanted to love you."
quote: "Lost in thought, she stepped into the kitchen to search for something to eat and started when she felt Matt's hand on her wrist."
quote: "\"Do you feel good about the advice you just gave that poor woman?\""
quote: "\"I don't know which poor woman you're referring to, unless you mean one of the naked ones you've been ogling for the last forty-five minutes.\""
quote: "\"I'm talking about JoBeth and all that bullshit about cows and free milk.\""
quote: "\"It may be bullshit to you, but to that woman it's a question of self-preservation. I'm entirely comfortable with the advice I gave her. If it weren't for irresponsible men like you and that Dawg she's in love with, maintaining self-respect wouldn't be so damned difficult.\""
quote: "They glared at each other, neither willing to look away first. After a long moment, Olivia drew a calming breath and pulled her wrist out of his grasp. She'd known all along that the only way to survive the week was by maintaining her distance. Turning her back on him, she retrieved her briefcase from the floor next to the console and pulled out a sheaf of papers."
quote: "Coming to stand in front of him, she waved them in his face. \"I've taken the liberty of drawing up some suggestions for our time together.\""
quote: "She saw him bite back a laugh and watched the insulting glint of amusement steal into his eyes."
quote: "\"I'll be glad to read them to you, if necessary. They don't have as many pictures as your usual reading material.\""
quote: "She handed the pages over one at a time, practically nailing them to his chest with her finger. \"This is a bathroom schedule. I've blocked out the mornings for myself, since I have to be up and on the air by nine o'clock. I wasn't sure what time of day you liked to shower, so I left your side blank.\""
quote: "When he didn't comment, she continued. \"I usually just grab a sandwich or something, but I'm willing to make extra for you and leave it in the fridge so we can eat in shifts. That way we won't be tripping over each other in the kitchen.\""
quote: "He studied her from beneath sable lashes most women would kill for."
quote: "\"I figured whoever ate last could handle cleanup. Obviously, on this chart you're 'M' and I'm 'O.' \""
quote: "\"We should probably work out a schedule for the television, too. There are only a few programs I watch regularly.\" She handed him a blank form and cleared her throat. \"I've gone ahead and divided the living area into two sections so that we each have a place to sit and relax without intruding on the other.\""
quote: "Matt walked the three steps to the refrigerator and took out a beer. Bringing it back to the living room, he took the diagram she handed him—the one with a dotted line down the middle of the sofa—took a long sip of beer, and sat right in the middle of her section. Then he put his feet on \"her\" half of the cocktail table and looked up into her eyes. \"Tell me, Olivia, just what is it about me that scares you so?\" He took another swig of beer while he considered her from beneath hooded eyes."
quote: "\"Don't flatter yourself, Matt. I just want to be sure you understand what's acceptable. Take dressing and undressing, for example.\""
quote: "\"You're planning to tell me when to dress and undress?\" He set his beer down and flipped through the sheaf of papers. \"I can't wait to see this diagram.\""
quote: "\"Well, you've certainly spent a lot of energy thinking all this out, Olivia. It's very . . . industrious of you.\" He paused. \"I'll be sure and give your suggestions the consideration they deserve.\""
quote: "Lunchtime at the Magnolia Diner was no time for deep thought, a fact JoBeth appreciated at this particular point in her life. She'd already wasted an inordinate amount of time worrying over her relationship with Dawg Rollins, and an embarrassing amount in tears since she'd moved out two days ago. Crying over her disappointments was a luxury she'd never before allowed herself, and she wasn't wild about the idea now. She might not have a whole lot else, but she'd always had her pride."
quote: "Hefting her loaded tray high over one shoulder, JoBeth snatched up a fresh pot of coffee with her free hand and backed through the swinging door. Before she swung around to face her waiting customers, she found and put on her brightest smile. A good waitress didn't bring her personal problems to work. And she didn't slack off because some fool man had gone and mangled her heart."
quote: "\"Hey, Bert.\" One-handed, she set the tray on a serving stand and commenced to dole out the food, refilling coffee mugs as she worked her way around the table of four. \"How's that new grandbaby of yours?\""
quote: "\"Just fine, darlin'. Head looks kind of like a bowling ball to me, but my Darcy's real proud of him.\""
quote: "\"That's great.\" JoBeth fought off a brief stab of envy at Darcy's good fortune. \"You tell her to bring that boy in here soon. I want to have a look at him.\""
quote: "Whipping her order pad out of the front pocket of her starched white apron, JoBeth pulled a gnarled pencil from behind her ear and moved on to the next table."
quote: "\"Hey, Homer, Myra. You gonna have the fried chicken today?\" She scribbled out their ticket and slipped her pencil back behind her ear as she contemplated the white-haired McCauleys holding hands in their favorite booth. JoBeth tried to imagine herself and Dawg snuggling in a corner booth somewhere thirty or forty years from now, but the picture just wouldn't come."
quote: "Blinking back tears, she swapped the coffeepot for a pitcher of sweet tea and leaned over to pour the elderly couple's drinks. \"You leave some room for dessert now, you hear? Ina made her strawberry rhubarb pie today.\""
quote: "With calm precision, JoBeth worked her tables, taking orders, refilling drinks, chatting up the regulars. There was comfort in the routine tasks, satisfaction in the occasional appreciative glance sent her way. Her fortieth birthday had come and gone, but L'Oréal kept her short red curls free of the evil gray intruders, and she liked to believe that the fine lines now radiating outward from the corners of her eyes lent character to what she'd always thought of as a too-cute face. Smoothing a hand down her hip, she paused to straighten her apron and give herself a pep talk."
quote: "There would be life after Dawg Rollins, just as there'd been life during those long years of caring for her parents, and life after they died."
quote: "She had lots of good years ahead, years she could spend on herself now, if she chose. Plenty of time to get the college degree she'd always dreamed of and to turn the tiny house she'd inherited into a home. If Dawg didn't want to be with her while she did those things, she'd do them alone or take Dr. O's advice and find someone who didn't just say he loved her, but proved it. Someone who wanted to have a child with her before it was time to check into a nursing home."
quote: "The bell on the front door jangled, and awareness crept up JoBeth's spine. Even before she turned to look, she knew it was Dawg. Her heart raced like it always did at her first sight of him, but she made a point not to show it."
quote: "JoBeth wiped her palms on the short skirt of her uniform and stood her ground as he approached."
quote: "She managed a polite nod before forcing herself to turn and go about her work, but she breathed a small sigh of relief when he had the good sense to bypass his usual seat in her section."
quote: "From the corner of her eye, she watched him chitchat with Jackie at the register and say something amusing to Emmylou at the counter where he took a vacant stool."
quote: "JoBeth frowned. Dawg sure didn't look like a man who'd lost the love of his life. And he sure as hell didn't appear to be nursing any broken heart."
quote: "JoBeth's fingers clenched on the handle of the iced tea pitcher as Emmylou batted her eyelashes at Dawg and leaned across the counter to display her double D's. When Emmylou turned and strutted her stuff back to the kitchen, Dawg's eyes were practically glued to the blonde's behind."
quote: "Putting down the pitcher, JoBeth walked through the counter opening, brushing past Dawg. Without a word, she opened the pie case, yanked the strawberry rhubarb off its shelf, and cut two large slices for the McCauleys, leaving the remainder on the counter. Emmylou served up Dawg's Mile High Burger, with a wide toothy smile on the side."
quote: "The big lummox winked and tucked into his burger, unaware of how close to death he'd strayed. He chewed with relish for a while, then put down his burger to take a big swig of tea."
quote: "JoBeth delivered the McCauleys' desserts and came back to face Dawg across the counter, the strawberry rhubarb in front of her."
quote: "They studied each other, taking silent stock, and she felt her damned heart kick up again. Her insides went all warm and soft under his regard, and her pulse skittered just beneath her skin. Unconsciously, her hands wrapped around the pie plate."
quote: "\"Aw, hell, JoBeth.\" His voice was quiet and full of a lot of things she couldn't put a finger on. \"When are you going to get over all this marriage nonsense and come on back home?\""
quote: "JoBeth swallowed. She wanted to take Dawg's head and cradle it against her bosom. Or slam it against the wall. It was a difficult choice."
quote: "\"Don't you talk to me about empty. I'm about as alone in this world as it's possible to be right now. But I'm not looking for company. I want someone to share my life with. In my book that requires a Justice of the Peace.\""
quote: "\"Now, JoBeth, if you'd just calm down and come on home, I'm sure—\""
quote: "\"I'm not coming back, Dawg. We're not kids, and I'm not interested in being your live-in girlfriend anymore.\""
quote: "\"Don't you 'JoBeth honey' me. And don't you come into my place of work and ogle other women.\""
quote: "\"But you're the one who moved out. You're the one who said—\""
quote: "\"I know exactly what I said. You don't have to throw it back in my face. You're the one who doesn't seem to be getting the point.\" Her fingers picked nervously at the fluted edge of the pie plate."
quote: "\"Oh, I get the point all right. It's just like Matt Ransom said. My big mistake was not being clear up front. I love you, JoBeth, but I don't want to get married. I've been married, and it's not the picnic you seem to think it is.\""
quote: "A hush fell over the diner as the last of the lunch crowd gave up the pretense of eating. JoBeth pried her gaze from Dawg's for a slow scan of the room. Even the McCauleys were staring in shocked amazement at her and Dawg. Emmylou tittered out loud."
quote: "\"Well, now you've managed to humiliate me in person.\" Was that her voice going all shrill and quivery? \"Why don't you just take out an ad in the damn paper— 'JoBeth Namey gives great milk but she's not worth marrying.' \""
quote: "Dawg shot her a look of such wounded outrage that she almost managed to get herself under control. If he'd apologized then, or offered one ounce of reassurance that he'd never thought of her that way, she might have been able to avoid what came next. But keeping quiet had never been Dawg's strong suit."
quote: "\"Now that is about the stupidest thing I've ever heard you say.\""
quote: "\"Stupid? Now you're calling me stupid?\" Her hands stilled. Embarrassment spiked up her spine, fueling her anger, which was a lot easier to deal with than the hurt and desperation she'd been feeling. Then he got that annoying look on his face, the one that said he was the calm, rational one, and she was some harebrained female, and her hands wrapped tighter around the aluminum pie plate."
quote: "\"The stupidest thing I ever did was waste three years loving you.\" The next thing she knew, she was hefting the pie plate in her right hand, savoring its weight. \"But I sure do hate to leave you without something to remember me by.\""
quote: "A smart man would have backed off then, or at least put some distance between himself and an angry woman with a partially cocked pie, but Dawg just sat there glaring back at her, his face only inches from what remained of the strawberry rhubarb."
quote: "\"Do what you gotta do, JoBeth. You are not making a lick of sense anyhow. And you haven't been since you started calling that Dr. O.\""
quote: "She knew better, really she did. It wasn't going to solve anything, and it certainly wasn't going to win her any waitressing awards. But a herd of wild animals couldn't have made her put the pie down at this point."
quote: "She heard a collective gasp as she lifted the pie and pushed it firmly into the middle of Dawg's irritating face. No one spoke as she ground the pie back and forth with the heel of her hand until the flaky brown crust worked its way into the grooves of his face."
quote: "Dawg sat completely still. He barely blinked as the red-colored goo began to drip down his chin. For a minute she half expected him to stick his tongue out for a taste like they did on TV, but he didn't move a muscle."
quote: "Momentarily stunned by what she'd done, JoBeth froze, too. The silence ended just as suddenly as it had begun. The buzz of excitement built around her but it was once-removed, like something that was happening to someone else. She could barely think, let alone come up with an appropriately cutting remark. And instead of the elation she expected, she felt only regret . . . and the insistent welling of tears she refused to shed."
quote: "JoBeth placed the empty pie plate down on the counter in front of her. Then she untied her apron and laid it gently on the Formica next to it."
quote: "A dull ache settled around her heart as she faced the man she'd hoped to grow old with, but it was too late now for regrets. She straightened slowly and looked Dawg Rollins straight in the eye—the one not currently covered with crust."
quote: "With a small smile and an apologetic shrug, she pulled her order pad from her pocket and passed it over to Emmylou. She didn't think she'd have any trouble getting the rest of the afternoon off."
quote: "Matt wiped steam from the bathroom mirror. Still humming the tune he couldn't seem to push out of his head, he lathered his face and then shaved in time to the mental beat. A slash of deodorant, a splash of aftershave, and he was set."
quote: "With the towel tucked around his hips, he left the steamy warmth of the bathroom. From the hallway he spotted Olivia behind the kitchen counter, knife aloft, and spent a moment or two imagining just what sort of meal she might be making with the provisions she'd laid in."
quote: "Olivia kept her head down and her gaze on the counter, but the stiffness of her shoulders and the rigid tilt of her head revealed her awareness of him. He almost felt sorry for her, trapped as she was with a man who knew just how much heat simmered beneath her cool facade."
quote: "A gentleman would allow her to pretend indifference. But no one had ever accused him of being a gentleman."
quote: "In his bedroom he dropped the towel and dressed quickly, then padded, barefoot, out to the living room."
quote: "Olivia looked up from her seat at the kitchen table."
quote: "Olivia stopped in mid chew. He waited patiently while she swallowed and then took a sip of her Diet Coke. She dabbed delicately at the corner of her mouth with her napkin, as if she were dining in a five-star establishment."
quote: "\"Peanut butter and jelly. I made an extra sandwich if you're hungry.\""
quote: "\"Yep.\" She dropped the last bite into her mouth, chewed it thoroughly, and swallowed. \"Is this a problem for you?\""
quote: "\"No. I've just never met anyone over the age of ten who would consider that an actual meal.\""
quote: "\"Well, I know the difference between PB&J and . . . dinner. But if your taste buds are willing to settle, who am I to criticize?\""
quote: "\"So is this what you eat every night, or are Monday nights special?\""
quote: "\"What are you, the food police?\" She dabbed once more at her mouth and then got up to throw her napkin away, erasing all evidence of her meal."
quote: "Matt shrugged. \"I'd just hate to see you waste away on my watch.\""
quote: "Olivia went to the pantry and pulled out a bag of chocolate chip cookies. He watched as she removed one cylinder, opened the plastic casing, and took out three cookies. Replacing the bag, she moved over to the counter, munching happily. \"I'm hardly wasting away. And I'm sure even you have heard of comfort food. Lots of people like to eat foods that remind them of their childhoods.\""
quote: "\"Not me. I prefer my comforts grown-up. And without chocolate bits.\" He leered at her—just in case she hadn't caught his meaning."
quote: "She bit daintily into a cookie and ignored him. Pointedly."
quote: "Undaunted, Matt began to assemble ingredients for his dinner. From the fridge he pulled wrapped packages containing paper-thin medallions of veal and sliced mushrooms. From the case of wine, he selected a Barolo and pulled two wineglasses out of the cupboard."
quote: "Olivia finished the final chocolate chip cookie and slid onto a barstool."
quote: "\"You're going to drink before you go on the air?\""
quote: "\"But what? I have roughly three and a half hours until I go on, I don't have to drive to work, and I'm not planning to operate any heavy machinery.\""
quote: "\"We don't have any heavy machinery here, do we?\""
quote: "She studied him from beneath spiky lashes. Her eyes were a lovely shade of green flecked with tiny shards of hazel. And they were not amused."
quote: "Since she hadn't exactly refused, Matt poured a generous glass of wine for both of them and set hers in front of her. He swirled the heavy red liquid and sniffed appreciatively before taking a satisfying sip of his own. Then he started to cook."
quote: "Within minutes he had dredged the veal in flour and had butter melting in a large sauté pan."
quote: "\"That's right.\" Without taking his gaze off her, he emptied the mushrooms into the waiting butter."
quote: "\"Yep.\" He allowed himself a small smile but held a tight rein on his laughter. \"Too bad you've already eaten. I make a mean veal marsala.\""
quote: "\"Veal marsala.\" Her voice was little more than a whisper. \"You're making veal marsala?\""
quote: "Olivia looked as if she'd just discovered the world was actually flat after all, and he couldn't resist passing the perfectly sautéed mushrooms under her nose as he removed them from the pan and set them aside. She sniffed audibly, a reflex action that told him she'd probably cave in and join him if he asked her again."
quote: "Which left him feeling smug, in charge, and completely in control. Until Olivia licked her lips. He watched, fascinated, as the tip of her tongue darted out and worked its way across the bow of her mouth. His own hunger spiked, though it had nothing to do with the meal he was preparing."
quote: "She took a sip from her glass, and then she ran her tongue over her lips once again. They were wet and dewy with wine, and Matt considered volunteering to dry them off with his own. He glanced up quickly but caught no hint of malice or sexual intent in her eyes. They were, however, full of hunger and lust—all of it focused on his veal marsala."
quote: "Matt put pasta in a pot of boiling water and broke up a loaf of Italian bread. For a few minutes he cooked in silence, sipping his wine while he contemplated the situation. However attractive he found Olivia, no matter what the sight of her tongue skimming over her lips did to him, she was the competition. Only one of them would walk out of this apartment with a radio show on WTLK. And while he doubted he'd be on the street for long, he had no intention of coming in second."
quote: "Feeding Olivia would be like offering aid to the enemy. He wanted her off balance and uncertain. Could he use food and drink to help achieve that end?"
quote: "He drained the linguini, put a large helping on the plate next to the veal, and then topped the cutlets with marsala sauce. The aroma made his mouth water."
quote: "Matt slid his plate across the counter, topped off both their wines, and moved around to claim the stool next to Olivia's. Her entire body tilted precariously toward his plate, and her eyes were locked on the result of his culinary efforts."
quote: "\"Gosh, I feel bad eating in front of you like this.\" He tried to look truly apologetic, but it was hard to pull it off when she looked as if she might land face first in the center of his veal."
quote: "He waited for her to say something. A little polite begging and the second helping could be hers, but she just closed her eyes and breathed deeply, no doubt committing the smell of veal marsala to memory for replay during her next PB&J extravaganza."
quote: "\"No, no. Don't be silly,\" she said. \"I'm, uh, just going to finish my wine and watch the food, I mean . . . tube, for a bit. You go right ahead and meat . . . I mean, eat.\""
quote: "Matt clinked his wineglass against hers and took a healthy sip, enjoying the flush of embarrassment that rushed up her cheeks at the obvious Freudian slip. He watched her as he slipped a forkful of veal and mushroom into his mouth, and had the satisfaction of seeing her wince with envy. His cooking had thrown her off balance, which was exactly the way he wanted her. Surely he had enough resources at his disposal to keep Olivia Moore permanently off kilter. All he had to do was identify them."
quote: "Her green eyes clouded under his perusal. She took a sip of wine, swallowed it, and stole a surreptitious glance at his plate, as if to reassure herself she wasn't imagining things. \"Did you know how to cook in Chicago?\""
quote: "\"When we knew each other in Chicago, did you already know how to cook like this?\""
quote: "He couldn't remember sharing a single meal with her, though he knew there'd been many. What he remembered was her earnest innocence and the joy with which she'd given herself to him."
quote: "He could tell from the stain spreading across her cheeks and the way she shifted in her chair that her memories were no more food related than his."
quote: "He paused for a moment, waiting for a reaction, and sure enough, her eyes fluttered closed. Encouraged, he continued. \"I'll never forget how cool and smooth your skin used to feel under my tongue.\""
quote: "Matt reached a hand out to brush his knuckle down the curve of her cheek. \"And I remember the little sounds you used to make when I was inside you. And how you used to sink your nails into my back when you were ready to come.\""
quote: "He used the truth and their memories to probe beneath the cool exterior, hoping to find the woman who had once dwelt inside. \"Do you remember?\""
quote: "Olivia's eyes were suddenly wary. Unsure whether she was about to turn tail and run or round on him with teeth bared, Matt turned and glanced up at the Webcam monitor. What he saw there at first stopped him cold and then filled him with delight. He cocked his head and studied the video image a moment longer while he considered the possibilities."
quote: "The shot revealed the mostly empty bottle of wine, the two wineglasses, and himself and Dr. O engaged in what appeared to be an intimate tête-à-tête. The average viewer would see only what was framed in the camera, and that didn't include the snarl springing to Olivia's lips or the warning glint stealing into her eyes."
quote: "She uncrossed her long legs and sat up straighter on her stool. The steely look she sent him made him grateful that Mother Nature hadn't seen fit to endow her with the defense mechanisms of either the skunk or the porcupine. With the Webcam and its misleading image in the forefront of his mind, he maintained the illusion of intimacy by staying put."
quote: "\"Don't think you're going to use what was between us, Matt. I already regret that we ever had a past, and I'm going to do everything in my power to make sure we don't have a future.\""
quote: "He put a hand out to cup the back of her neck and used his thumb to caress her cheek once more. She tensed at his touch, but he ignored it, keeping his voice low and his body language intentionally intimate. \"You go ahead and give it your best shot, Olivia. But I still remember every delicious thing about you, and as you may have noticed, I've learned a thing or two about good food over the last eight years.\""
quote: "\"You really think you're every woman's fantasy, don't you? You've been listening to your own show too long. I am not even remotely tempted.\""
quote: "\"Liar.\" Even to his ears, the word sounded suspiciously like a caress. Matt smiled as Olivia slipped out from beneath his hand. He couldn't help admiring the picture she presented as she made her exit—striding across the living room with her head held high and her shoulders thrown back. She sat on the edge of the couch, her posture painfully correct, and picked up the TV remote like a queen reaching for her scepter. Very carefully she tuned CNN in and, he suspected, the disturbing Matt Ransom out."
quote: "Being dismissed didn't bother Matt in the least. He'd noticed the way Olivia had responded to him."
quote: "If he wanted to come out of this week the victor, undermining his opponent's formidable powers of self-control would certainly give him an advantage."
quote: "It was time to bring out the big guns, time to lay siege to Dr. Moore's castle of calm. Thanks to his friend the Webcam, he now knew exactly how to breach her defenses."
quote: "In the WTLK control room, Charles Crankower studied the Webcam monitor with interest. At the audio board, with his back to Charles, Matt's producer, Ben Markum, set up for the night's show. Olivia's producer stood next to him discussing some problem with the on-hold system that she wanted fixed before morning. Charles tuned them both out to concentrate on the drama unfolding on the screen."
quote: "Matt and Olivia sat at the counter with a bottle of wine between them. They looked much cozier than he would have expected, and as he watched, Matt not only reached out and cupped the back of the doctor's neck, but caressed her cheek with his hand. Charles waited for Matt to either kiss her or get smacked, but neither happened."
quote: "A glance out of the corner of his eye confirmed that the couple on the screen now had Ben's and Diane's attention, too. In silence, the three of them watched Olivia storm off to the couch while Matt cleaned up the kitchen, and he knew he wasn't the only one wondering what in the hell was going on."
quote: "When Matt moved to sit down at the audio board, Olivia passed by him without a glance, and all three of them watched her bedroom door close behind her."
quote: "Charles was still puzzling over what he'd seen as Matt put on his headphones, propped his feet up on the audio table, and leaned back in his chair."
quote: "\"What do you think, Ben?\" Charles started at the sound of Matt's voice booming over the control room speakers. \"How long do you think it'll take me to have her eating out of my hand?\""
quote: "Ben looked over his shoulder at Diane and Charles. \"Hey, Matt, there's, uh . . .\""
quote: "Matt laughed. \"Forget about eating out of my hand. I'll bet you a hundred bucks I'll have her flat on her back before the end of the week.\""
quote: "Diane Lowe froze, while Ben hurried to cut his boss off. \"Matt, this isn't a good time to . . .\""
quote: "Ben put on his headphones and shut off the control room speaker, turning the conversation private. After aiming a withering glare at Ben, Diane stormed out of the room, but Charles just sat there thinking about the possibilities. This promotion was his brainchild, and he intended to use it to prove he could handle things at WTLK without interference from the corporate office. What better way to preserve his autonomy than with a local promotion that garnered national attention?"
quote: "Charles smiled at the thought, because anything resembling a relationship between the proper Dr. Moore and the alley cat Matt Ransom would warrant that kind of attention. It was his job to make sure of it."
quote: "Snuggling deep under the covers, she breathed in the good thoughts and tried to breathe out the bad. She could do this, of course she could. All she needed was a good night's sleep."
quote: "\"Thanks for the donation, man. Remember, you can donate food or money, and you can donate it in the name of guys everywhere. To find out how we're stacking up against the ladies, just log onto our website for an up-to-the-minute tally.\""
quote: "A prerecorded chanting of \"Go men, go men, donate\" done to the foot-stomping rhythm of \"We will, we will, rock you\" played out full blast as Matt engineered a one-man pep rally."
quote: "The chant continued for several seconds and then faded out. The next thing she heard was the unexpected sound of waves washing up on the shore. If she'd had any thoughts of falling asleep while she listened to Matt's show, his next words quashed them."
quote: "The sound of canned gasps and murmurs rose, then fell as Matt continued. \"Yeah, I know, I know. The woman is way too preoccupied with life's harsh realities.\""
quote: "Another wave rolled into shore, and the surf pounded. A gull cawed."
quote: "\"I prefer a little fantasy in my life. Tonight I'm going to show you how to add some to yours.\""
quote: "Olivia let out the breath she held and abandoned the in-and-out thing. Like a conductor staring into the headlights of an oncoming train, she closed her eyes and braced for the crash."
quote: "\"Pretend for a minute that you're shipwrecked on a deserted island. You've got warm trade winds, a lovely little inlet for swimming and fishing, and unlike Tom Hanks, you do not have to form an intimate relationship with a rubber product. You get to choose both your companions and your supplies. This is, after all, your fantasy.\""
quote: "Reggae music snuck up full and then lowered to background volume. Gulls called again and mingled with the subtle rhythm of waves lapping gently on the shore. Olivia could almost feel the sun on her back as Matt continued."
quote: "\"It's a gorgeous day. The sand is like powdered sugar. The sea is that bright blue-green color it gets when the sun is dancing on top of it. I can see a shipping channel off in the distance, so I know when I'm ready to be rescued everything will get worked out. No pressure, just a great escape.\""
quote: "His voice was as powerful and warm as a deep-tissue massage, and Olivia began to relax despite herself. What could happen on an island getaway?"
quote: "The soft strains of \"Don't Worry Be Happy\" joined the audio mix and then disappeared beneath the mesmerizing timbre of Matt Ransom's voice."
quote: "\"I walk down the beach and discover two crates that have come in on the tide. One of them holds twenty-four jars of beluga caviar packed in ice. The other is a case of Guinness with an opener attached.\""
quote: "The happy island music cranked up and then faded back under."
quote: "Male sighs of ecstasy mingled with the island sound effects. Then came several seconds of teasing feminine laughter."
quote: "\"Okay, guys, that's my scenario, but everyone gets to create his own.\""
quote: "Matt paused and then brought the soft feminine laughter up once more."
quote: "Olivia was just getting ready to write off the whole thing as a waste of time when Dawg came on the air. She recognized his name from her conversations with JoBeth, and she wasn't surprised to discover that he spoke like a good ole Southern boy—and an unhappy one at that."
quote: "\"Dawg. Did you call to pledge food or to visit Fantasy Island?\""
quote: "\"Well, I wanted to pledge some milk for the food drive, but I'm not getting any of that anymore.\""
quote: "\"I'm sorry to hear it, man. You definitely deserve a getaway. Who do you want to take with you?\""
quote: "\"JoBeth. She's the only one I want on my island, but thanks to you and that Dr. O, she doesn't want to have anything to do with me.\""
quote: "\"Matt, I don't think you're listening. JoBeth has moved out. And not only that, she'll barely talk to me. Threw a damn pie in my face when I tried to get her to come back home.\""
quote: "Olivia sat up in bed, intrigued, but Matt refused to be drawn into Dawg's reality."
quote: "Olivia felt her spine stiffen. She heard none of Dawg's protests or Matt's flip responses as he moved on to the next caller. She remembered all too well how easily Matt had switched buses in Chicago, though she couldn't understand why the memory still hurt."
quote: "Olivia burrowed back down beneath the covers. She wanted to be in her own bed. She wanted her life back. She also wanted to be asleep right this very minute and not lying here wondering whether Matt Ransom really remembered exactly how she had tasted eight years ago."
quote: "Olivia reached over to snap off the radio, but something perverse inside her made her keep listening."
quote: "\"I've got Jason on the air. Who are you with, Jason, and what have you brought with you?\""
quote: "\"Wow. I can't believe I got through. I listen to your show all the time.\""
quote: "\"Thanks, Jason. Does your mother know you're up this late?\""
quote: "Jason laughed, but Matt was right. The caller sounded distinctly pubescent."
quote: "Jason cleared his throat nervously. \"Well, I, um, spend the first day just hanging out drinking beer.\""
quote: "\"You can imagine yourself under a palm tree drinking until you puke if you want to, Jason, but I'm not sure this will appeal to our other listeners. So . . .\""
quote: "\"Yeah. It's just a bunch of trees lashed together with a little lean-to on one corner. And there's some kind of material rigged on a really tall branch for a sail.\""
quote: "\"Well, at first I can't tell if there's anyone on the raft or not. But then I spot this really long pair of legs sticking out of the lean-to.\""
quote: "There was a pause and Olivia imagined she could hear the boy's Adam's apple bob up and down."
quote: "\"Very good, Jason. You have real potential. Who is she?\""
quote: "\"I can't tell yet. But when she comes out and stands up, I can tell that she's really tall, you know. Like an Amazon.\""
quote: "\"Well, she's tall like her, but she's blonde. And it's really weird, but there's something familiar about her, you know?\""
quote: "\"Well, she's naked except for this little, like, animal skin between her legs. And she's tan. All over.\" Jason's voice went up another octave."
quote: "\"This would be from floating on the raft without clothing?\" Matt's tone was dry."
quote: "\"Yeah, I guess. Anyway, she steps off the raft onto the beach and I can see that she's in really incredible shape, but older. You know, like thirty or something.\""
quote: "Jason totally missed Matt's sarcasm, but as a woman turning thirty in a matter of days, Olivia was not amused."
quote: "\"So I can't believe this is happening, and I—\""
quote: "\"Jason, please. Just tell us who the woman is. Believe me, at this point, that's all anyone wants to know.\""
quote: "\"Well, that's the really strange thing, you know? Because when she gets closer I recognize her.\""
quote: "\"And, well, I hope it's okay to say this.\""
quote: "\"Don't worry, Jason. As long as it's not obscene, you're okay with—\""
quote: "\"It's that head doctor you're locked up with. The one you call Dr. O.\""
quote: "\"Why, of all the . . .\" Olivia muttered as she sat straight up in bed. She flipped on the light and swung her legs over the side."
quote: "Matt's shout of laughter filled her ears. He laughed for a good thirty seconds until Olivia pictured tears running down his face."
quote: "\"Boy, Jason. I have to hand it to you. I didn't even see it coming.\""
quote: "\"What a fertile imagination you have, son. And a thing for older women, too. I can just picture how flattered Dr. Moore will be when she discovers she's every boy's fantasy.\""
quote: "When she heard the first commercial come up, Olivia yanked open her bedroom door. Unwilling to get too close to the Webcam, she stood in the doorway and hissed, \"What do you think you're doing?\""
quote: "He got up, walked around the equipment, and came to stand in front of her door. \"Nice pajamas.\" Reaching out a hand, he traced a part of the design with his finger. \"Are those sheep?\""
quote: "Olivia slapped his hand away. \"How dare you set that boy up to talk about me that way?\""
quote: "\"I know you did. And I won't stand for it.\""
quote: "\"This is talk radio, Olivia. People say things. I did not put those words in that boy's mouth.\" He laughed. \"But I really wish I had.\""
quote: "\"Listen, I hate to interrupt, but I'm back on in thirty seconds. Why don't you come on out and tell my listeners how you feel?\""
quote: "His hand clamped around her wrist. \"Come on. You can give Jason a piece of your mind and tell the world that you've never been on a raft naked in your life.\""
quote: "Amusement tugged at the corners of his mouth. \"And be sure to stand right in front of the camera so they can see the pretty pink and blue sheep on your jammies.\""
quote: "The challenge in his eyes was unmistakable. He wanted her out there in her sheep pajamas trying to defend herself against a ridiculous teenage fantasy. Which was all the reason she needed not to."
quote: "JoBeth waved goodbye to her daddy's La-Z-Boy recliner."
quote: "\"We sure do appreciate the donation, JoBeth. This'll help make the group room a whole lot cozier.\""
quote: "JoBeth watched the pickup back out of the driveway and make a right out of the small Lawrenceville neighborhood. She knew exactly what Horace Namey would have said about his prized possession serving out the rest of its usefulness under rear ends at the Union Mission Halfway House, and the thought of his outrage provided the first real smile she'd managed in days."
quote: "She walked back into the tiny house. The living room was empty except for the few pieces she'd claimed for herself. She ran a hand over the old pine sideboard that had belonged to her great-grandmother and let her gaze linger on the bun-footed curio cabinet that now held the best of her mother's Depression glass. Dropping into the rocker she'd dragged in from the front porch, she surveyed the beginnings of the room's transformation with pride."
quote: "The baseboards and trim gleamed under a fresh coat of white paint, and the corners and edges of the room's longest wall carried a first coat of apple green. She planned to finish painting the living room today and start on the kitchen tomorrow. JoBeth found comfort in the logical progression of the work and fully intended to deal with her inheritance the same way she'd learned to deal with her life—one day at a time."
quote: "Originally, she'd thought she was fixing up the house to sell and had imagined the proceeds as a kind of dowry she'd bring to her marriage to Dawg, her contribution to their life together. Now there would be no life together, and there was no reason to sell. She'd fix the house up for herself, get one of those home equity loans so that she could see some of the world or go to college full-time. She'd spent her twenties running around wild, and most of her thirties taking care of her parents. It was more than time to start looking after herself, like Dr. Olivia said."
quote: "JoBeth turned the baseball cap backward on her head to keep the brim out of her way and rolled up the bottoms of her overalls so they wouldn't end up apple green. The smell of fresh paint battled the old, more familiar smells of cigarette smoke and medicine, vanquishing them in the same way the pretty pastel green drowned out the dingy undercoat of white."
quote: "She moved the ladder onto the newspaper that lined the edges of the room, and hooked on the aluminum paint tray. After climbing the first few rungs, she dipped her roller into the paint."
quote: "As she reached for the wall, the screen door creaked open, then slammed shut. Before she could turn, boots clumped across the hardwood floor and came to a stop behind her. She recognized the footsteps even before she heard Dawg's voice."
quote: "She didn't turn or pause in her painting. She just tapped the excess paint off the roller and began to apply it to the wall."
quote: "She extended the roller smoothly upward, then brought it back down. \"No, thanks.\""
quote: "\"I, uh, just wanted to see how you were doing.\""
quote: "\"I'm fine.\" She lifted the roller out of the pan, reached for the wall without tapping off the extra paint, and felt a glob land on her cheek. The back of her free hand found the glob and turned it into a smear."
quote: "\"It looks a lot bigger here without all your folks' stuff in it.\""
quote: "\"Yep.\" Hurt warred with anger, and JoBeth stoked the latter, afraid of what would happen if she showed the least bit of weakness. She needed Dawg out of here now, before she caved in and let him see just how miserable she was without him."
quote: "She heard his boots clump down the adjoining hallway, heard a door creak open, and heard the sound grow muffled by carpet. With an iron grip on the roller, she continued spreading paint on the wall, keeping her movements slow and controlled until Dawg clumped back and stopped directly behind her."
quote: "\"You'd rather sleep on the floor than stay with me?\""
quote: "Feeling the crackle of his anger in the air about her, JoBeth set the roller in the pan and backed down the ladder. Once her feet touched the floor, she had no choice but to turn and meet his gaze. Schooling her paint-streaked features into a casual expression, she turned her face up to his. Dawg hadn't bothered to mask his feelings, so she was forced to stare into his storm cloud of a face, all dark and seething with disbelief."
quote: "He ran a ham-sized hand through his hair and then shoved it into the pocket of his jeans. \"I told you you could have my spare room until you got things taken care of here.\""
quote: "\"I don't need your spare room when I have a perfectly good house sitting right here.\" She inhaled the rugged spice of his aftershave and felt herself drawn to the massive body she knew so well. Alarmed, she pushed by him and came to a halt a good foot and a half away, where resisting him would be easier."
quote: "\"But what about us, JoBeth? How can you walk away from three years?\""
quote: "\"I'm not the one turning my back on what we've had, Dawg Rollins.\""
quote: "\"Aw, honey.\" He reached out toward her, clearly intending to scoop her up into one of his big, brawny embraces, the kind that had always made her feel so safe and protected. If she let him get his hands on her, she knew she'd be lost."
quote: "\"Look, I'm sorry about the pie thing yesterday. I didn't care for the way Emmylou was behaving, and I took it out on you. You have every right to rub up against anyone you want to.\""
quote: "Dawg grunted and shook his head, but he didn't tell her he didn't want Emmylou, or that he was ready to settle down and get married."
quote: "\"I'm too old to play games, Dawg. I love you, but I expect I'll get over it.\" She felt a tear slide down the side of her cheek to mingle with the apple green paint, and before she could stop it, another one slid through the mess."
quote: "\"Aw, hell, JoBeth.\" Dawg drew her into his arms and cradled her against the soft cotton T-shirt that stretched across his rock-hard chest."
quote: "For all his great strength, his touch was remarkably gentle. As unwilling as he was to make a commitment, he'd never been shy about showing his affection. She closed her eyes to hold back the longing when he placed a kiss on the top of her baseball cap and used his big fingers to tuck a stray lock of hair behind her ear."
quote: "\"Lord, but you are one hardheaded woman. I cannot for the life of me figure out why you are so hell-bent on getting married. It's just words and a piece of paper, JoBeth. And you are tossing everything away to get them.\""
quote: "He put a finger under her chin and lifted her face up to his. She knew she must look ridiculous with the paint running down her face and the ugly tears welling out of her eyes, but she saw only tenderness reflected in his. When he joined his lips to hers, it was with a sweetness that made her heart ache inside her chest."
quote: "To JoBeth's way of thinking, you signed the piece of paper and spoke the words because the other person brought out the best in you; because you were more with them than you could ever be on your own. It proved you meant to stick when it would be easier to give up."
quote: "But she didn't know how to explain that to Dawg, any more than she could explain how important it was to make the commitment out of love and not the stifling sense of duty that had held her parents' marriage together."
quote: "She wanted to lift her arms up around Dawg's neck and whisper her love for him, but she couldn't give in now. Nor could she follow him back home with her tail between her legs, grateful for whatever scraps of commitment he was willing to toss her way."
quote: "He released her lips but held her gaze with his. \"You know where to find me when you come to your senses, JoBeth.\""
quote: "\"And you know where to find me,\" she countered. \"But I really can't say for how long.\""
quote: "Olivia prowled the apartment like a caged animal. From his seat at the kitchen table, Matt watched her pace off the confines of their prison, past the couch to peer out the French doors of the balcony, back to the tiny kitchen to stare out the postage-stamp window at the brick wall beyond."
quote: "For a while he just enjoyed the long-legged grace of her, the swirl of blonde hair teasing against slim shoulders, and the way the occasional ray of sunlight caught her hair and separated it into a hundred different shades of gold."
quote: "She ignored him as she paced, her gaze skimming over him, then moving away."
quote: "\"It is a bit tight in here, isn't it?\""
quote: "She turned her back on him and strode over to the television armoire, not even sparing a glance for the camera perched on top. \"I'd give anything to head out for a run right now. Just a little one. I'd come back.\""
quote: "\"Yeah, I'll mention your idea to T.J. and Charles. Maybe they'll let me out after my show for a couple of drinks. I'd come back, too.\""
quote: "Her snort of laughter was not at all flattering, but she did stop pacing. \"Do you think it's possible to accrue time out for good behavior?\""
quote: "Her desperation added a sparkle to her green eyes that Matt found oddly endearing."
quote: "\"Or maybe we're just going to be stuck in here until we're so old it doesn't matter anymore.\""
quote: "\"Ah, ah, ah.\" He wagged his finger at her. \"I believe you're allowing your glass to become half empty rather than half full. It's just a week out of your life, Olivia.\""
quote: "\"At the end of which, one of us, preferably you, will be out of a show.\""
quote: "Matt shrugged and stood. \"You have to admit it does add a certain . . . piquancy to the whole situation.\""
quote: "He walked around the table to stand beside her. He moved a little closer, intentionally invading her space, and watched her eyes glaze over. It was obvious Olivia wanted to step back and put more space between them, but she held her ground. \"You'll forgive me for saying so, but you seem a little tense.\""
quote: "She averted her gaze. \"Tense? Me?\" She shook her head and offered what he supposed was meant to be a smile."
quote: "\"Turn around.\" He took hold of her shoulders and spun her around. Without asking permission, he began to massage her neck. When she tried to pull away, he pulled out his trump card. \"You don't want our viewers to think you're afraid of me, do you, Liv?\""
quote: "A quick glance up at the monitor told him that, once again, he and Olivia looked decidedly cozy. But then the viewing audience couldn't feel what he felt beneath his constantly moving hands. Olivia was as tightly strung as a bow, and he knew it was only pride that kept her from jerking away. Working his way down her throat one last time, Matt brought his hands to rest on the nape of her neck and thought about making her quiver."
quote: "And, damn it, so did he. He willed himself into submission, offered himself some very direct words of discouragement, but crucial body parts didn't seem to be listening. In fact, he seemed to have gone completely deaf below the waist."
quote: "If there was one thing he'd always been able to count on, it was his self-control. Not that he'd needed to call on it all that often, of course, but it had always been there at the ready. He was fairly certain of this."
quote: "Now he was the one taking a step back, carefully separating his front from Olivia's behind before she encountered the evidence of what touching her did to him. It would never do to let her hold it against him the way he'd been planning to hold it against her."
quote: "He turned Olivia around to face him and saw her eyes narrow with suspicion. \"What are you doing?\""
quote: "\"Gee, how tempting. I've always dreamed of performing nude before a national audience.\""
quote: "\"I'm here, Livvy. Willing and able to make that dream come true.\""
quote: "\"An incredibly generous offer, Matt. But I don't think I need to be quite that relaxed. Any other ideas?\""
quote: "She tilted her head at him and cocked an eyebrow. \"Absolutely. Are you volunteering?\""
quote: "\"In a way.\" He pulled the punching bag away from the wall and dragged it to the patch of space between the dining and living areas. \"It's not quite as effective as sex, but it will release some of the same, er, energy.\""
quote: "The caricature of his face stared out at them from the side of the bag. Beneath it were the words PLACE FIST HERE."
quote: "Matt worked the gloves onto her hands, careful to keep his distance as he laced them up."
quote: "\"Right.\" He aimed her at the bag and pulled the gloves up in front of her face, the right slightly above the left, in the classic fighter's stance. \"I hope this won't be too complicated for you.\""
quote: "\"Why don't you use real small words like you do on your show while I listen real carefully? Maybe we'll get lucky.\""
quote: "Olivia put her right arm out and connected with the bag."
quote: "\"Not bad. But you need to do it like you mean it. A real quick extension and a hard jab before you pull back.\""
quote: "She jabbed harder, making solid contact with the picture of his face."
quote: "\"Okay, champ. Why don't you try that with your left, now? Take it across your body at an angle, like this,\" he pulled her glove forward, \"and jab hard.\""
quote: "Olivia followed his instructions and clipped the side of his caricature's face."
quote: "He knew he should move around behind her to better help guide her punches, but was reluctant to get too close to the delicious backside. It would be a hell of a lot easier to use his body to unsettle her if his own weren't so eager to take the bit in its teeth."
quote: "Matt stayed where he was as she began to dance around on the balls of her feet. Something about the way she held her body gave him the sense that she'd done this before."
quote: "\"How's this?\" She jabbed harder, pummeling the bag with both gloves, working into a barrage of blows. Right after left, then two quick lefts and another right."
quote: "Her arms were tanned and gently muscled, and her full breasts bobbled beneath the sleeveless T-shirt that had come untucked at the waist. He liked watching her body move. Whether pacing or punching, she had a natural grace that drew his eye and definitely held his attention."
quote: "Matt stepped in closer and crouched over a bit, intrigued by the rotation of her hips as she moved from foot to foot. Her belly was flat, and there was an occasional flash of smooth skin as her T-shirt rose with her movements. The way she bobbed and weaved struck a chord in the back of his mind."
quote: "He forgot both his plans and her flying fists as her hair came loose from its clip and swirled seductively around her shoulders. In fact, he was at exactly breast height and getting quite a jiggly eyeful when he saw her body start to whip around and heard the beginning of her breathless warning."
quote: "And then he heard nothing but the resounding thud of her foot connecting with the side of his jaw, followed by the slap of his body hitting the floor."
quote: "None of your publicity mentions a former career as an assassin.\" Matt lay flat on the floor where Olivia's kick had sent him."
quote: "He turned his head toward her and slowly opened his eyes. \"What in the hell did you hit me with?\""
quote: "\"Try not to talk.\" Olivia squatted down next to him and pressed a dishtowel stuffed with ice against his jaw."
quote: "Pushing her hand away, Matt pulled himself into a sitting position and ran a hand tentatively along the side of his jaw. When it reached the big tender spot, he winced."
quote: "\"Here. Hold this on it.\" She placed the makeshift ice pack in his hand and directed it toward his face, noting the grimace when cold met throbbing skin. \"It was a spinning hook kick. I didn't see you bend over.\""
quote: "\"Well, I'm not a professional or anything.\" She put a hand out to stop him when he started to remove the ice. \"Keep the cold pack on it, Matt. You're going to have a big-time bruise as it is.\""
quote: "\"I was only on the amateur circuit for a couple of years.\""
quote: "\"Oh. Well. That must be why I'm still alive.\" He leaned back so that his shoulders rested against the back of the sofa and drew his knees up in front of him. \"How long was I out?\""
quote: "He closed his eyes and sighed. \"You don't need to spare my feelings now, Olivia. The station's recording the Webcam feed twenty-four hours a day. They're probably already rerunning the KO in slow motion.\""
quote: "\"You were only out for about a minute. Not all that long.\""
quote: "\"Oh, great. I was afraid this was going to be embarrassing or something.\""
quote: "\"No, I don't want you to call a doctor.\" He moved as if to stand, but seemed to reconsider. \"I thought you were a runner.\""
quote: "\"I was until it got too hard to go out and sweat in public. You'd be surprised what my listeners have decided I should and shouldn't do.\""
quote: "\"Yeah. I bet they feel real good about your ability to tear men apart with your feet. Aren't people in the helping professions supposed to be nonviolent? I mean, what did you do, get a doctorate in psychology and a master's in martial arts?\""
quote: "The phone rang, eliminating the need for a response, and Olivia left him propped against the couch while she went to answer."
quote: "She handed him the phone and then stood beside him to eavesdrop."
quote: "\"No, Charles. Don't call anyone. I'm fine. Olivia just kicked the shit out of my face. It's no big deal.\" He started to grin up at her, but the grin turned into a grimace of pain. He moved the ice to another spot on his jaw. \"Yes, if anyone's going to hurt anyone again, we'll be sure to call you first.\" Matt rolled his eyes, a move that didn't require the use of his jaw. \"Yes, I promise. Yes, I'll get up off the floor now. Goodbye, Charles.\""
quote: "Matt turned the phone off and rose slowly from the carpet. \"He wasn't happy about not being able to promo our altercation, and he doesn't want me sitting on the floor. Evidently my pain and suffering aren't visible enough from down here.\""
quote: "He walked around to the front of the couch and plopped himself down on it, offering a jaunty wave to the Webcam as he went. \"Charles is becoming quite the tyrant, isn't he?\""
quote: "Olivia sat down on the edge of the couch and pressed the ice back against Matt's jaw. \"And why not? He's got us performing like a couple of trained apes, while he's out there poking sticks through the bars of our cage.\""
quote: "\"Well, this monkey's thirsty. How about a cold one from the fridge?\""
quote: "\"I guess I did more damage than I realized. Aren't your arms and legs working?\""
quote: "\"My injuries are not all visible. You coldcocked me in front of a live audience. Just think of the dent you put in my masculine pride. We're talking major emotional pain and suffering.\" He kept his expression tragic, but there was an unholy twinkle in his eye. \"I'd say you owe me some special treatment.\""
quote: "Olivia went to the refrigerator and extracted a Newcastle, which she presented to him with a flourish. \"For you, Your Injured Highness.\""
quote: "Matt took a long pull on the beer. \"Ahh, I think I feel my wounds beginning to mend already.\" He took another sip and set the bottle on the table beside him as Olivia turned to go. \"But I also hear my stomach rumbling. I was going to make linguini with clam sauce, but I'm not sure I have the strength.\""
quote: "Olivia turned back to face Matt. \"You're asking me to make you dinner?\""
quote: "\"Well, I do need to rest up for my show, and I'm going to have to eat to produce energy for all those hours of talk.\""
quote: "\"You don't seem to be having any trouble running your mouth right now.\""
quote: "\"I know there must be at least a flicker of guilt buried under your unconcerned facade.\" He leaned forward so that she could plump the pillow behind his head and then settled back into the couch with a grateful sigh."
quote: "\"Thanks. You don't mind if I put on the Braves game while you whip up a little something, do you? They're playing the Cardinals.\""
quote: "Without waiting for an answer, Matt pointed the remote at the TV and tuned in the game. Then he reapplied the ice to his jaw and reached for the beer with his free hand. She saw him smile as he crossed his long legs at the ankle and settled in to watch."
quote: "Without a word, Olivia made her way to the kitchen. She did in fact feel guilty about knocking him out, but if he was thinking linguini with anything, he was in for a disappointment."
quote: "While Matt lolled on the couch, Olivia foraged in the kitchen. Ten minutes later she laid his dinner tray on the cocktail table."
quote: "Matt eyed his meal with interest. \"Gee, I haven't had grilled cheese and tomato soup since elementary school. Can we have cookies and milk for dessert?\""
quote: "\"If you behave yourself, I might part with a few of my Chips Ahoy. But only because you're injured.\""
quote: "\"I guess I'll have to mind my manners, then, won't I?\" He lifted one golden brown triangle to his lips and took a healthy bite. Then he took a long pull on the beer. \"Maddux is pitching. The count's two balls, one strike.\""
quote: "Olivia wouldn't have minded watching the game, but she never actually got the chance to sit down. First she cooked another grilled cheese—this time made with sourdough bread and a fat slice of tomato at Matt's request. Then she fetched aspirin and water to combat the throbbing he said he felt in his jaw, though it didn't seem to stop him from voicing an ever-increasing list of demands."
quote: "While she contemplated the possibility of taping his mouth shut in the guise of first aid, he wolfed down a whole sleeve of her chocolate chip cookies and started on a second bottle of beer."
quote: "She had just taken a first bite of her own long-cold sandwich when Matt held up the makeshift ice pack and waved it in her direction."
quote: "\"If you're not too busy?\" He handed her the plastic bag that she'd tucked inside a dishtowel. \"My ice seems to be melting.\""
quote: "\"Funny what a blast of hot air can do.\" Olivia snatched the baggie out of Matt's hand and went to the freezer to refill it."
quote: "\"Oh, and while you're up, I was thinking that—\""
quote: "\"No.\" She slammed the freezer shut. \"No more thinking. No more food and drink. No more requests.\""
quote: "\"Why, Olivia, what happened to your bedside manner? I'm going to have to call the nurse's union about your attitude.\""
quote: "Olivia stalked back to the couch. \"I'll bring you the phone if you'd like to call an ambulance or a cab, but I will not bring you one more ridiculous thing.\""
quote: "Standing over him, she lifted the bag full of ice, positioned it precisely, and when she had his complete attention, dropped it directly into his crotch."
quote: "\"What's going on in that apartment, Matt? How could you let the doctor get the drop on you like that?\""
quote: "Matt raised the ice pack to his jaw. \"Great. So all of Atlanta has seen it, huh?\""
quote: "\"And then some. Your own station's promoting the hell out of it. They're talking about offering a poster of Dr. O's foot hitting your jaw as part of a giveaway. Do you have any idea how I could get one?\""
quote: "\"Not in this lifetime.\" Matt dropped the call and punched up the next."
quote: "\"Matt, you're not looking so good at the moment, buddy.\""
quote: "\"Maybe, but you're giving us guys a bad name. I couldn't believe it when I saw you hit the floor. I'm donating a carton of Wheaties in your name. And half a dozen cans of spinach.\""
quote: "\"You're welcome. And if you'd like a little free advice, you ought to dismantle the punching bag while she's asleep. The boxing gloves definitely belong in the dumpster.\""
quote: "\"Yeah. Great plan. And maybe I can glue her feet to the floor to give myself an extra advantage, huh?\" Matt dropped the call just as Olivia wandered out of her bedroom and headed for the kitchen. \"Wimps, all of you,\" he finished. \"Sometimes you just have to take it on the chin . . . or jaw, like a man.\""
quote: "Without a word, Olivia picked up her headphones, plugged them into the board, and walked into the kitchen to put a kettle on to boil. He'd just opened his mouth to comment when he noticed the new message scrolling across his monitor. Instead of the usual caller name and opinion, his producer had simply typed \"va-va-vavoom.\" Matt put the mystery caller on the air."
quote: "\"Oh, I wouldn't do that.\" The voice was female and sultry, not his usual brand of caller at all. \"I'm actually calling to offer my sympathies.\""
quote: "Matt sat up straighter in his seat. \"Sympathy? Now that's been in short supply tonight.\""
quote: "\"I sure do hope your jaw is feeling better, Matt. And I'll tell you something else. If I were locked up with a big, strong hunk of man like you, I wouldn't be wasting my energy on a punching bag.\""
quote: "He cut his gaze toward the kitchen and caught a glimpse of Olivia standing stock-still, her hand outstretched toward the kettle."
quote: "\"Now that's exactly what I was telling the good doctor before she laid me low.\" He leaned in closer to the microphone and let his tone grow as intimate as his caller's. \"You'd never knock a guy out, would you?\""
quote: "Matt kept his gaze trained on Olivia, who was still doing her statue imitation despite the now-howling teakettle."
quote: "He bit back a grin as Olivia's jaw clenched."
quote: "\"Why, thank you. I do pride myself on knowing how to treat a man.\" The caller's voice was close to a purr. If he wasn't mistaken, Olivia looked ready to roar."
quote: "\"I bet you wouldn't have to be forced into cooking a meal or pampering a fellow a bit, either.\""
quote: "\"You're right about that. I think men deserve all kinds of attention. And if you make it out of that apartment in one piece, I'd like to give you some. Um, attention, that is.\""
quote: "Olivia snatched the kettle off the stove and the whistling stopped abruptly."
quote: "Matt kept a watchful eye on Olivia—and the boiling water—as he ended the call with, \"Now there's an offer no man in his right mind would refuse. You check in with me anytime you feel like it.\""
quote: "Matt flipped his microphone off and stepped around the console. \"You look ready to deck someone . . . again. I hope you're not expecting me to turn the other cheek?\""
quote: "\"I can't bear to hear women talk as if their entire mission in life is to make some man happy. And you, of course, lapped it up as if it were your due.\""
quote: "\"It was a harmless flirtation, Livvy. Men and women have been talking to each other that way since Eve tempted Adam. I don't think she meant any more by it than I did. It was just a little wordplay.\""
quote: "He moved closer, intentionally invading her space. \"Jealous, Livvy? I have plenty of wordplay to go around. Hell, we could kill a little time looking up new definitions in the dictionary.\""
quote: "They stared at each other for a long moment, neither budging. Olivia's eyes still sparked with anger; they'd deepened to a verdant green that made him think of primeval forests."
quote: "\"You need to lighten up, Olivia. I happen to know firsthand that life is way too short to waste it sweating the small stuff. And in the end, it's all small stuff.\""
quote: "She folded her arms in front of her chest and tilted her chin up another notch. \"If this is all so insignificant to you, why don't you just concede right now, Matt? Call a halt to this whole charade and move your show someplace else. You were pretty hot in Chicago, as I recall.\""
quote: "\"I'm not conceding a damn thing. But I'm sorely tempted to teach you how to enjoy yourself. Without the ability to relax and enjoy, all the success in the world isn't going to do a thing for you.\""
quote: "\"Thank you so much, Professor Ransom, for that introduction to Fun and Frolic 101. I'm sure you're qualified to teach at the graduate level.\""
quote: "Olivia didn't see Matt again until the next afternoon. She was staring out the French doors at the tiny park across the apartment parking lot when she heard a noise behind her."
quote: "His jaw looked slightly puffy, but otherwise he seemed none the worse for his encounter with her foot. He tipped a Coke can at her in greeting. \"Morning.\""
quote: "He ran a hand down the smoothly shaven side of his face, pausing momentarily over the point of impact. \"I'll survive as long as you keep your feet to yourself.\""
quote: "Matt's gaze strayed to the jar of peanut butter sitting on the counter. \"I see you've dined.\""
quote: "\"No. I just hate to see you go through life undernourished.\" He yawned and scratched at his midsection. \"Mind if I turn on the TV?\""
quote: "\"TV?\" Olivia glanced down at her watch. \"But there's nothing on right now but the—\""
quote: "Olivia could feel the disbelief etched all over her face, but there was no way Matt Ransom watched daytime television."
quote: "\"Soap operas, as in 'My mother slept with your father and you're my second stepbrother twice removed so we shouldn't be having this affair' soap operas?\""
quote: "\"Well, I don't remember that exact story line, but that's the basic idea.\""
quote: "Matt propped his feet up on the cocktail table and settled back into the couch, patting the space beside him. \"Come sit down. If you leave the remote to me, we can watch both of them.\""
quote: "She knew he was going to spring something on her or find a way to make her look bad, because this just couldn't be true. \"You're telling me that Atlanta's 'Hundred-Time Bachelor of the Year, Mr. Macho Guy Talk,' is a closet soapie?\""
quote: "\"There's nothing closet about me, Olivia. I'm hooked. Have been since I watched my first episode back in '78. That's when Bobbie Spencer brought her big brother Luke to Port Charles to try to land Laura in reform school.\""
quote: "\"Because our older sister didn't get home until fifteen minutes after the show started, and she paid me a dollar to watch the beginning and fill her in on what she missed.\""
quote: "Matt threw back his head and laughed, and Olivia caught herself wanting to join in. It was all so wonderfully absurd."
quote: "\"Well, when I was about fifteen, I discovered what a great pick-up tool it was. Just me and the girls discussing who was cheating on whom.\" He looked incredibly pleased with himself."
quote: "His smile was slow and sensual, the brown of his eyes turning as warm as a tumbler full of whiskey. Suddenly, it felt as if someone had sucked all the air out of the apartment. \"Not usually. Now it's just a great escape. After all those hours of talk, it feels good to be brain-dead for a while.\""
quote: "\"I wasn't aware you used your brain all that much in your work.\""
quote: "Matt didn't bite or react to the barb, but leaned in closer until she could feel the warmth of his breath tickling her cheek. \"Don't you ever want to shut that overworked brain of yours down, Olivia? You know, just turn it off and enjoy yourself?\""
quote: "It must have been the power of suggestion. Or maybe it was how close he was and how husky his voice had gone—as if it were completely weighted down with sex—but Olivia felt her normally nimble thoughts slow to a crawl. Then her vision blurred around the edges and the air turned hot and thick with something she did not want to identify."
quote: "He lowered his lips to hers and kissed her—a soft, gentle joining that took her completely by surprise. The breath caught in her throat, and her pulse fluttered like butterfly wings beneath her skin."
quote: "Cradling the back of her head in the palm of his hand, he drew her closer and deepened the kiss, his gentleness giving way to something more urgent."
quote: "She wanted to do just as he'd instructed, wanted to lose herself in his touch, wanted to let him make love to her once more, wanted to forget about the silly competition between them."
quote: "\"Why, you . . .\" Appalled, she pulled back. Her brain, still struggling to get back up to speed, couldn't come up with anything bad enough to call him."
quote: "Matt's eyes lit with amusement. \"I was just trying to help you relax.\""
quote: "\"If I want to relax, I'll take up yoga.\""
quote: "What she wanted to do was slap his smug, handsome face. Hard. In front of the world. So that no one would know just how much she'd wanted him to kiss her. Her hand itched to make contact, but she'd already perpetrated too much violence in the last twenty-four hours, and she didn't intend to win her time slot by maiming her opponent—no matter how much he deserved it."
quote: "Olivia retreated to the other couch. \"I don't know what you're trying to do here, but it's not going to work.\""
quote: "Olivia picked up the phone and speed-dialed the station. Though she and Matt were allowed free access to their producers, up until now she'd only called Diane to discuss business. At the moment, however, thoughts of her show were running a distant second to the need for human contact with someone other than Matt Ransom. Someone in the real world. Someone she could trust."
quote: "There was an expectant pause, during which Olivia wracked her brain for a topic of conversation."
quote: "Diane sighed. \"I've lost roughly one tenth of one pound, and if I eat another piece of raw fish I'm going to have to apply for a job at SeaWorld. In the tank.\""
quote: "\"You know, if you'd just give up on these crazy diets and let me help you explore why you're using food to—\""
quote: "\"I know, boss, I know. I just keep thinking one of them will actually work.\" Her laugh was rueful. \"So what can I do for you?\""
quote: "\"Hey, I'll be outside at dawn with an extra horse if that's what you want.\""
quote: "The idea of escaping was all too appealing. She drummed her fingers on the table, not ready to hang up, but unable to come up with a legitimate reason to stay on the line."
quote: "\"So, um, is there something in particular you wanted to talk to me about?\" Diane asked."
quote: "Olivia felt like a mountain climber dangling off the side of a cliff clutching her lifeline. If she hung up, would she go careening down the side of the mountain?"
quote: "\"You know, if you ever really need out of there, all you have to do is—\""
quote: "\"No. Don't even go there, Di. Quitting is not an option.\""
quote: "\"Okay, then. What would you like to talk about? The show? The weather? Kissing Matt Ransom?\""
quote: "\"I can think of a whole lot of adjectives that could be applied to that kiss, but unnoticeable isn't one of them.\""
quote: "Diane's curiosity hummed across the phone line, and suddenly a free fall down the mountainside seemed safer than pursuing this particular line of conversation."
quote: "\"Yes, well. I think I'm going to have to go now, Di.\""
quote: "\"You're going to hang up without telling me how it felt?\""
quote: "\"Afraid so.\" She lifted a hand and waggled it toward the Webcam."
quote: "\"Not even a few descriptive words for those of us who've always wondered?\""
quote: "\"I don't suppose you'd consider describing his veal marsala?\""
quote: "Matt drizzled lemon butter over the pompano fillets and wrapped them in parchment. Yellow rice simmered on the stove, and a bottle of chardonnay sat open on the counter. An Anita Baker CD infused the room with an intimate warmth."
quote: "As soon as his lips had touched Olivia's, he'd realized his mistake. Within minutes, what had begun as a calculated maneuver to unnerve Olivia and keep the audience tuned in had turned into a humbling struggle for self-control. She should be sued for hiding all that heat and turbulence under that cool, touch-me-not exterior. It would take real agility for him to keep fanning the flames without getting burned."
quote: "Backing away from the refrigerator, Matt turned to find Olivia studying him from the other side of the counter. Her smile was wary, but she sniffed appreciatively."
quote: "Her smile warmed. \"Gee, I don't know. I was really looking forward to my usual peanut butter and jelly.\""
quote: "\"I'm not going to tie you to the chair and force-feed you, but if you want to set the table, you're welcome to join me.\""
quote: "\"Okay.\" Maintaining the maximum possible distance, Olivia set the table and took a seat on the opposite side of the counter."
quote: "Matt slid a glass of wine toward her, and they drank for a moment in silence. Olivia sat on the very edge of her barstool, as if she expected him to lunge across the counter and drag her into his arms at any moment. Whether the idea intrigued or appalled her he couldn't tell, but it sent his thoughts scurrying back to the kiss he'd stolen earlier."
quote: "He stirred the rice, and put a salad together, while his brain replayed the feel of her lips against his. It took a considerable effort to keep his responses to Olivia's questions even."
quote: "\"How long did you stay at WZNA after I left?\""
quote: "Matt pulled the fish out of the oven. \"I did afternoons there for another two years, and then I took over morning drive.\""
quote: "\"The King of Darkness made chitchat and played music at 6 A.M.?\""
quote: "\"It wasn't pretty. I only made it a year and a half before my body clock shorted out.\""
quote: "He stood and shrugged. \"Then I stopped fighting Mother Nature and moved to late night talk.\""
quote: "\"No.\" He forced his thoughts back to the choices he'd made in Chicago. \"When I approached the Program Director about doing a guys-only talk show, he couldn't believe I wanted to give up morning drive for what he assumed would be perpetual obscurity.\""
quote: "\"Yeah.\" Matt speared a piece of romaine. \"As it turned out, I really liked the talk thing.\""
quote: "He removed her empty salad plate and replaced it with a serving of pompano and rice, slicing open the parchment as she watched."
quote: "Olivia closed her eyes and breathed in deeply. \"Oh, God, Matt. This smells heavenly.\""
quote: "Her first mouthful of fish and rice produced a sigh of ecstasy. She took a second bite and a third, and he suspected she'd never again see peanut butter and jelly in the same light."
quote: "He let her wash it all down with a long sip of wine before picking up the conversation. \"You've made some history yourself.\""
quote: "Her laugh was rueful. \"Yeah, most of it because I married a guy who couldn't keep his pants zipped. Therapists are supposed to know better.\" She speared him with her gaze, and her tone turned dry. \"I seem to have a weakness for men just like my father.\""
quote: "He sliced open his own parchment but didn't lift his fork. \"I didn't cheat on you, Livvy. It's not cheating if there's no commitment.\""
quote: "\"You were barely out of college. Neither of us was ready to make a commitment.\""
quote: "\"No. One of us wasn't ready. The other never had a chance to express her opinion.\""
quote: "He tasted the rice and fish, but no longer felt like savoring the meal. It struck him that they'd never had this conversation, and he wasn't wild about having it now. Olivia had gotten too close, and he'd moved on. End of story— except for the eight years he'd spent trying to erase her memory. For the first time, he allowed himself to wonder how long it had taken her to forget about him. \"Olivia, you were a baby. You needed to go back to school and get your doctorate, not hang out in Chicago with the likes of me.\""
quote: "\"So you said. Repeatedly. And evidently it wasn't just me you didn't want to commit to.\""
quote: "He saw some emotion he couldn't identify sweep over her face and watched her shake it off."
quote: "\"But why are you still doing the hit-and-run thing, Matt? What is it about real intimacy that frightens you so?\""
quote: "\"I do believe you're getting ready to try and analyze me.\""
quote: "She took another sip of wine and ate for a few minutes in silence. When she spoke, it was with an intentional lightness. \"Hey, we've got eons of time ahead of us. If you're ready to seek help, I'm available.\" She scooped up a last morsel of fish with her fork and turned an impudent smile on him. \"If you keep cooking, I'll waive my hourly fee. That's a real bargain when you consider I get two hundred an hour for private consultation.\""
quote: "\"Right. So you're going to, what, peel me like an onion and expose all my innermost feelings to our listening audience in exchange for three square meals a day?\""
quote: "\"Gee, when you put it like that, I can hardly wait to get started.\""
quote: "Matt stood and carried his plate to the kitchen, and Olivia followed suit. Together they piled dirty pots, pans, and dishes in the sink while he rummaged in the cabinet underneath for cleaning supplies. \"I'm stunned by the generosity of your offer, Olivia. I don't know why I didn't think of it myself.\""
quote: "Chinkapin Lanes roared on Wednesday nights. Packed to capacity for the weekly Couples League, the fifties-era bowling alley shook with sound in a way its more modern competitors did not. Balls thundered down wooden lanes, pins crashed madly against each other, and music blared from an antiquated audio system that actually shook, rattled, and rolled. Despite the din, or perhaps because of it, men and women let their hair down at the Chinkapin. It was said there were Wednesday-night teams that had outlasted many marriages."
quote: "This Wednesday was the first in more than three years that Dawg Rollins arrived at Chinkapin Couples League alone. He'd missed driving over with JoBeth, missed her droll recap of her day at the diner, and her interest in the details of his. He'd come early as usual, had placed the usual beer and pizza order, and stowed his bowling bag under the seat, but it just didn't feel like Wednesday night without JoBeth at his side."
quote: "If she'd arrived with him, JoBeth would already be making funny comments about who was hitting on whom and sharing odd news stories she'd found in the newspaper. Instead, Dawg chatted quietly with the captain of the other team while he waited for the rest of his team to arrive. And while he chatted he wondered how JoBeth's day had gone and whether she'd caught herself wondering about his."
quote: "\"Hey, handsome.\" Emmylou gave him a wink and a hug and added what looked like a whole new wiggle to her walk. While he and Paul watched, she turned her back on them and bent from the waist to retrieve her ball from her bag. Dawg found himself holding his breath as her flowered capris stretched even tighter across her lush backside, testing the limits of fabric science and treating them both to an awesome floral display."
quote: "\"Kinda makes a guy wish he was a bumblebee, doesn't it?\" Paul's gaze never wavered from Emmylou's flowercovered rear end."
quote: "\"I can see how the idea of pollination might pop up,\" Dawg replied."
quote: "\"Of course, some of us are free to think about the birds and the bees all we like.\" Paul thumped himself on the chest and turned sympathetic eyes on Dawg. \"Others of us would just be asking for trouble.\""
quote: "\"You keep eyeing Emmylou's backside that way and JoBeth's gonna end up on death row for murder one. And I'm not sure which one of you she'll blow away first.\""
quote: "Dawg rubbed his jaw. \"JoBeth does tend to get a bit jealous, doesn't she?\""
quote: "Paul glanced around the alley and his brow furrowed. \"Say, where is JoBeth?\""
quote: "\"She decided to drive herself tonight. She'll be along any minute.\" He avoided Paul's gaze and busied himself with retying his bowling shoe."
quote: "\"Have I mentioned how sorry I am that I screwed things up so bad with Dorie?\""
quote: "\"Good. I mean, I'm glad JoBeth brought Emmylou in so we could field a team and all, but I sure would like to be bowling with Dorie again.\" He dropped his voice. \"I miss the shit out of her.\""
quote: "\"Yeah?\" Dawg had no intention of telling his friend how badly he'd screwed up his own relationship. And he didn't intend to give up on JoBeth Namey just yet, either."
quote: "\"Yeah.\" Paul drummed nervous fingers on the table and then mercifully changed the topic. \"You ordered the beer yet?\""
quote: "\"Well, thank God for that.\" They both watched Emmylou's backside rotate over to the other alley, where she stopped to talk to a member of the opposing team. \"I had a hell of a day.\""
quote: "Dawg dragged his thoughts from Emmylou's rear end and its place in his plans. Paul was an electrician whose clientele included residents of the more affluent suburbs in north Fulton County. \"What happened?\""
quote: "\"You remember that customer I told you about up in Alpharetta?\""
quote: "\"The one that keeps coming to the door in a see-through nightie?\""
quote: "\"That's the one.\" Paul slid onto the banquette across from Dawg and leaned closer, his voice dropping to a whisper. \"Today I go out there about 10 A.M. to install recessed lighting in the basement.\""
quote: "\"And she's not only wearing the see-through nightie, but she insists on going up the ladder to show me where to put the fixtures.\" He paused dramatically. \"She didn't have a stitch on underneath.\""
quote: "\"Nope. I thought I was going to swallow my tongue.\""
quote: "Both of their heads jerked up at the sound of JoBeth's voice. Paul turned three shades of red, and Dawg suspected he looked just as guilty."
quote: "\"Lord, JoBeth, you could give a guy a heart attack sneaking up on him that way.\""
quote: "\"I'm surprised you didn't have one earlier, P.W., ogling your customer that way.\" She wagged a finger at the two of them. \"And the poor woman unable to afford underwear . . .\""
quote: "Paul hooted with laughter while Dawg watched JoBeth remove her ball from her bowling bag with the same clean, economical movements she applied to everything she did. He kept his tone purposefully light, like hers, as he responded. \"Maybe you should offer her a discount so she can buy some before your next visit.\""
quote: "\"Or maybe Paul should stop swallowing his tongue and take some sort of action.\" JoBeth's tone was still light, but it was clear they were no longer talking about Paul's customer."
quote: "Dawg looked down at JoBeth just as she looked up at him. They stood still, gazes locked, while Paul's swung back and forth between them. \"Yeah, JoBeth, sure. And what if I decide to be this woman's boy toy? How would you feel about that?\""
quote: "JoBeth didn't turn around. She just kept staring right into Dawg's eyes."
quote: "\"Right. Well. It looks like the beer's here,\" Paul continued."
quote: "\"Fine. I'll, uh, go coach Emmylou a bit. I don't think she's ever been up against Todd's bunch before.\" Paul backed away from them slowly, a puzzled frown on his face."
quote: "\"You really think Paul should be jumping some strange woman's bones?\" Dawg asked."
quote: "\"No. But he's a free agent, and it's obviously what the woman wants. For some reason she's just not coming out and saying so.\""
quote: "\"I've always been direct. When did it start bothering you?\""
quote: "Dawg shrugged. He was in no mood to rehash her ultimatum, but he was ready to demonstrate her plan's fatal flaw. \"So what exactly do you see happening now?\""
quote: "\"Well, I guess we both get out there and meet new people.\""
quote: "\"Okay.\" Dawg shrugged again, careful to keep his expression casual."
quote: "\"Okay, I'm ready to get started, if you are.\" He didn't allow himself to smile at her stunned expression. Instead, he aimed an obvious glance at Emmylou's backside and let his gaze run up the blonde's body to linger on her breasts. Then he turned back to JoBeth, who seemed to be grinding her teeth. \"There's no time like the present.\""
quote: "By the middle of the second game, JoBeth couldn't decide which irritated her more—the way Emmylou managed to shake and wiggle her incredibly large behind at every opportunity, or the fact that Dawg obviously relished the show."
quote: "If Dawg had always been aware of Emmylou's way-too-obvious charms, he'd been smart enough to hide it. Until tonight. Now he appeared to be president of the Emmylou fan club and kept shouting things like, \"Nice frame, Em. Try to release it like I showed you.\""
quote: "Midway through the first game, Dawg had started coaching Emmylou. During a break in play, with the whole damn alley looking on, he'd pulled her backside to his front and led her through the approach and release of the ball—not once but several times. Neither the hands-on demonstration nor the verbal coaching appeared to be doing much for Emmylou's game, but it was having a decided effect on JoBeth's."
quote: "During the third or fourth frame, she'd begun picturing Emmylou's face on the headpin. Now, every time she got up to bowl, she tried to knock the woman's block off. Her last two turns had been strikes, and she couldn't seem to bowl anything less than a spare."
quote: "Beyond annoyed, JoBeth waited for Emmylou to finish her turn. It took the big-haired blonde two tries to knock down five pins, but you'd have thought she'd just won a spot on the pro tour the way Dawg was grinning at her."
quote: "\"Thatta way, Emmylou. I swear you're a natural,\" he shouted."
quote: "With a triumphant smile on her face, Emmylou stepped off the alley and brushed past JoBeth. Like a country-fried Marilyn Monroe, she led with her bust and let her flower-covered fanny jut out behind as she made her way toward Dawg."
quote: "JoBeth looked down at her hands. She flexed them for just a moment, imagining the feel of them wrapped around Dawg's twenty-inch neck. She looked up to meet his knowing gaze and decided she'd settle for another strawberry rhubarb pie—as long as it had a small-caliber pistol baked inside."
quote: "At the score table, Emmylou draped herself over Dawg, turning sideways to sandwich his left shoulder between her doughy breasts like a ham caught between two slices of rye."
quote: "\"How was that, Dawgie?\" The woman's voice had gone Marilyn too, all breathy and suggestive."
quote: "\"Perfect, Em. Your game is definitely improving.\" Dawg let his hand slip down to cup Emmylou's backside—the one JoBeth wanted to kick to kingdom come. Emmylou basked in Dawg's attention like a kitten in the sun and carefully avoided meeting JoBeth's eyes."
quote: "And then Paul—thank God for Paul—was stepping up behind her and turning her gently back around to face the lane. \"I think this is where I'm supposed to tell you something moving and important, like 'Let's win this one for the gipper,' or 'Don't let him jerk your chain,' but all I can think of is 'Knock the shit out of those pins, JoBeth.' That man is not seriously interested in replacing you with that blonde blow-up doll.\""
quote: "JoBeth nodded her head, gritted her teeth, and focused on the pins. In her mind's eye she drew a picture of Dawg and Emmylou huddled together on the headpin, his big hand on her big ass."
quote: "It was the tenth frame. If she knocked all the pins down with her first ball, she stood a good chance of breaking 200. Even a spare could get her there."
quote: "JoBeth shut out everything around her. She brought the ball down as she made her approach, and when she reached the line, she let it fly. The ball spun madly down the center of the lane and crashed into the center pin. Pins exploded off the floor, bashed into each other, and fell down. When everything went still, only the ten pin remained standing."
quote: "\"Wow, JoBeth. You are looking good, girl. Go on and pick that sucker off.\" A glance at her teammates showed Paul practically dancing with excitement, while Dawg continued to play the ham to Emmylou's rye."
quote: "\"Hey, JoBeth. You sure are on fire!\" Todd Miller, the captain of the other team, waggled his eyebrows at her, but Dawg's hand still rested on Emmylou's rump."
quote: "\"Don't mess with my concentration, now, Todd. That ten pin needs to go.\" JoBeth kept her tone light and her smile bright, but her whole face hurt. The strain of forcing her mouth muscles upward when they wanted to turn downward and maybe even let out a whimper, was beginning to tell. She could feel the weight of tears forming and blinked her eyelids against them."
quote: "JoBeth brought the ball up to her chest, paused for a moment, and then went up on the balls of her feet. With her gaze riveted on the remaining pin, she stepped out with her right foot and swung the ball down into its backward arc. After three quick approach steps, JoBeth swung her arm forward and released the ball. There was a hush on both lanes as the ball made an initial hook to the right, skirted up the edge of the gutter, and then began to veer left. It came within a hair's breadth of the pin, and she heard a collective gasp as the pin rocked precariously in place. For what seemed like an eternity."
quote: "\"Shit.\" JoBeth stared at the lone pin in disbelief as it stood by itself, swaying in her ball's breeze, taunting her. It just stood there, too stubborn to fall down, until, at long last, the mechanical arm dropped down and swept it out of sight."
quote: "Conversation resumed as Paul stepped up and clapped her on the shoulder. \"A hundred and ninety five is nothing to sneer at, you know. Do you want me to go beat up Dawg for you?\""
quote: "She gave Paul a small smile and shook her head. \"Thanks, but if I let you do that now, I won't have anything to look forward to.\""
quote: "JoBeth left the alley and walked over to the table."
quote: "\"You almost got it, JoBeth.\" Emmylou's voice had lost some of its Marilyn sound, and she looked a little nervous."
quote: "Dawg met her gaze and held it. \"You're bowling real well tonight.\""
quote: "He shrugged, the motion sending his ham shoulder sliding up and down between Emmylou's slabs of rye. \"You set the rules. I'm just following them.\""
quote: "Telling Dawg to go out and find somebody to have fun with was one thing—watching him do it was quite another. The fact that he'd chosen Emmylou to flaunt in her face made things immeasurably worse. The slow burn that had kept her going all evening turned into cold, clammy dread. \"I'm going to go to the ladies' room. I'll be back before the final game, but I think you'd better find a replacement for next week.\""
quote: "\"I'll come with you.\" Emmylou bent to pick up her purse and in the process released Dawg's shoulder from her bosom. \"I need to powder my nose.\""
quote: "They covered the distance to the ladies' room in silence, but once inside, Emmylou put a hand out to stop JoBeth. \"Are you finished with Dawg, JoBeth?\""
quote: "She forced herself to look Emmylou straight in the eye. She saw the sparkle there, took in the becoming flush on the blonde's cheeks—all of it put there by the man JoBeth wanted to marry. The thought of Emmylou, or any other woman, taking her place was not something she would allow herself to dwell on."
quote: "JoBeth squared her shoulders. She shook the other woman's hand off her arm and reached down deep for some attitude. \"He's not exactly table scraps, Emmylou. I'm not going to wrap him up and send him home with you, if that's what you're asking.\""
quote: "\"You know what I mean. I'm asking if you're through with him. Is the man fair game?\""
quote: "JoBeth closed her eyes for just a moment, totally aghast at what she was about to say. If she had the first idea how to stop this thing she'd started, or knew any way to step back off the ledge she'd stepped out on, she'd do it. But she was already looking down at the traffic below, and the time had come to take the final leap."
quote: "This is Liv Live. It's Thursday morning, my fourth day in captivity, and I'm still kicking. Best of all, we're doing awesome in food donations.\" Olivia turned up the volume on the wild-applause sound effect and stood to make a half bow to the Web camera. \"Way to go, ladies.\""
quote: "Taking her seat, Olivia lowered her voice and attempted to set the tone for the remainder of the show. \"It's been an interesting morning so far, lots of phone calls coming in, but I think we've spent just about enough time on Matt Ransom. Let's move on, shall we? I'm here to talk about you—your thoughts, your problems. Go ahead and give me a call.\""
quote: "Olivia checked the monitor for the identity of her next caller. \"Hi, Michelle.\""
quote: "\"Well, actually, I'm a bit concerned about Matthew Ransom.\""
quote: "\"I think you mean unconscious. He was already senseless when he got here.\" Diane came up with a burst of canned laughter and Olivia added the \"ba-da-bing.\" \"He was only out for a minute or so. I'm sure he's fine.\""
quote: "\"Sometimes people appear to be fine, but actually are not. There can be delayed reactions and long-term effects. I'd advise that he be examined thoroughly. X rays would probably be a good idea, too.\""
quote: "\"And I suppose you'd be conducting that examination yourself?\""
quote: "\"Well, no. But we have people who do. I'm with Brant, Merriweather and Hodgson. We're personal injury attorneys.\""
quote: "\"Ookay . . .\" Olivia dumped the call without a moment's hesitation. \"Thanks so much for your concern. I'll be sure to pass it on.\""
quote: "She managed to keep the \"when hell freezes over\" part under her breath and contented herself with typing a scathing message to Diane, who was supposed to be screening her calls. Then she picked up the next line."
quote: "\"You're on the air, Amanda. What can I do for you?\""
quote: "\"Sorry, but I just have to ask about Matt Ransom, too, Dr. O. When I logged on Tuesday, he appeared to be lying on the floor having a near-death experience.\""
quote: "\"That's what happens when you put your face in front of someone's foot.\" Olivia had to stifle a smile at the memory."
quote: "\"No more than usual.\" Olivia went through the motions of a mimed drum riff, but didn't bother to go for the sound effects. God, she was tired of talking about Matt."
quote: "\"Well, I'm a nurse, and I can tell you that any blow to the face or head is cause for concern.\""
quote: "\"I wouldn't worry about Matt Ransom. He's every bit as annoying as he was before—which makes me think we can rule out permanent brain damage.\""
quote: "\"Well, I'm on duty all day today at St. Joe's if he needs anything.\""
quote: "\"Gee, Amanda, are you offering aid to the enemy? There are stiff penalties for that.\""
quote: "\"Or being kissed by Atlanta's Bachelor of the Year? That must have been really rough.\""
quote: "\"In case you haven't noticed, Dr. O, you're not doing time with Hannibal Lecter in there. Half the nurses on my shift would pay good money to take your place.\""
quote: "\"And I'd give a fortune to let them.\" Olivia let the call go and eyed the list of women waiting to go on the air. Most of them seemed intent on discussing Matt Ransom in some way or another. Nobody seemed to have a problem she wanted to discuss. Except herself . . . and that would require discussing the very person she didn't want to talk about."
quote: "Olivia allowed a few long moments of silence while she dumped all but the one call that listed something other than Matt as the topic. According to her computer screen, there was a woman named Rebecca waiting to discuss . . . horse racing?"
quote: "Olivia peered at the monitor, trying to understand what the words Diane had typed in could possibly have to do with anything, but \"jockey,\" \"short,\" and \"bet\" didn't exactly clarify the caller's problem."
quote: "She had a horrible suspicion that Matt Ransom was starting to rub off on her. She'd been entirely too flip, and too quick to dump deserving people who wanted her opinion—even if it was about her current roommate and this ridiculous promotion."
quote: "\"Okay, I've got Rebecca waiting on the line. If you have a problem you'd like to discuss, or food you'd like to pledge, start dialing now. We're almost out of time.\""
quote: "Olivia settled back in her chair and folded her hands on the table in front of her. She was ready for something she could sink her teeth into. Some sort of meaty relationship problem that would turn the tide of conversation and get everybody's juices flowing."
quote: "A twenty-something female voice came on the air. \"Hi, Dr. O. How are you this morning?\""
quote: "\"Better now, thanks. I'm ready to get down to work. Tell me what's on your mind.\""
quote: "\"Well, I'm not quite sure how to ask this question.\""
quote: "Olivia glanced down once more at the words Diane had used to preview Rebecca's call. \"Is it about your boyfriend the jockey?\""
quote: "\"My producer indicated that you had a question about a jockey. Do you work with horses, too?\""
quote: "There was a brief silence. Then Rebecca began to giggle. At first her laughter was restrained and ladylike, but it quickly developed into whoops of rolling-on-the-floor hilarity. When she finally quieted down enough to speak, Olivia could still hear the mirth lacing her voice."
quote: "\"I don't know where the horse-racing thing came from, Dr. Moore. Honest. I don't even have a boyfriend.\""
quote: "A sinking feeling settled in the pit of Olivia's stomach. Like an attorney who'd asked a witness a question without first knowing the answer, she'd made assumptions about her caller that were about to rise up and bite her right on the . . ."
quote: "\"My question is about underwear. You know, boxers versus briefs? I bet my friend you'd know what kind of underwear Matt Ransom wears. He's such an incredible hunk.\""
quote: "Olivia closed her eyes in weary resignation. She was a mental health professional. She'd spent years earning her Ph.D., treating clients, building a name for herself. And she had been reduced to fielding questions about what Matt Ransom wore to cover his bottom."
quote: "\"Go ahead and tell us, Dr. O, which is it? My friend Melody bet me he wears silk boxers. But he looks like a jockey kind of guy to me.\""
quote: "Clearly caught by surprise, she moved to click off the remote, but he reached out a hand to stop her. \"I doubt there's a rule in the psychologist's handbook against enjoying soap operas. You're obviously interested, so why are you hiding behind all this?\""
quote: "He drew the book off her lap, placed the yellow pad on top of it, and laid both on the coffee table."
quote: "\"Who will take me seriously if I spend half my day fielding calls about your choice of underwear and the other half panting over soap operas?\""
quote: "\"You're trapped in a tiny apartment in the middle of promotion hell with no one but me for company. No one's going to take you seriously anyway. Why not relax and enjoy yourself?\""
quote: "\"You always have an answer, don't you? I don't want to enjoy myself, and I have no desire to be more relaxed. I like being the way I am. It allows me to get things done, to accomplish my goals, to maintain a certain level of self-respect. You may be able to blow off the whole focus group thing, but my listeners have certain expectations.\""
quote: "She'd turned to face him when she started her tirade, but by her last word he noticed her trying to check out the television from the corner of her eye. He put both hands on either side of her head and turned it so that she faced the screen. \"Admit it. You're hooked and you want to know what's going to happen next.\""
quote: "\"Right. Whatever you say.\" He settled back into the cushions, plopped his feet on the cocktail table, and slid an arm across the back of the sofa. \"So, what did I miss?\""
quote: "\"You never give up, do you?\" Olivia's laugh was rueful. \"All right, someone that everybody is looking for is lying in bed naked while someone whose name I missed takes care of him. His wife just found his bloodstained briefcase at another woman's grave, but I don't really understand what that means. The only thing I know for sure is that she\"—Olivia pointed toward the woman leaning over the naked man's bedside—\"is not what she seems.\""
quote: "\"They never are. That's the fun of it. It'll take you a while to sort everybody out. Luckily the plot develops very slowly. Look, see that guy? He's a fugitive.\""
quote: "\"Yeah.\" The scene changed. \"And that guy's an alcoholic, but he's trying to win custody of his son.\""
quote: "A commercial came on, and Matt waited expectantly for the channel to change. Nothing happened. \"Don't you want to see what else is on?\""
quote: "They sat for two and a half minutes while a Wisk commercial segued into one for Stayfree Maxi Pads. When the Meow Mix jingle began to play, he couldn't take it any longer. \"Are you doing this intentionally?\""
quote: "\"Torturing you? All I'm doing is sitting here, waiting.\""
quote: "\"Exactly. This is because of the Victoria's Secret lingerie, isn't it?\""
quote: "\"Because I ate that veal marsala in front of you?\""
quote: "\"Don't you think you're overreacting just a little bit?\""
quote: "\"Is it because I bet Ben you'd go ballistic the first time I left the toilet seat up?\""
quote: "He put his hand out. \"Hand over the remote or I'll be forced to show your listeners exactly what kind of underwear I have on today.\""
quote: "She stared at him as if he'd sprouted a second head."
quote: "\"Look, just give me the remote and I'll show you how to handle it properly.\""
quote: "\"You're going to teach me how to use a remote?\""
quote: "\"We'll have to hope it turns out better than the boxing thing. You've never used a remote competitively, have you?\""
quote: "\"Okay, first of all, a remote is meant to be used. What's the point of all these channels if you can't see what's on at any given moment?\""
quote: "\"Okay. So you want to hold it loosely in your dominant hand. Mine happens to be my right, but it works both ways. You just let it rest in your palm so that you can use your thumb to punch in your selections.\""
quote: "\"Then you do a run-through of all your options, take a quick peek, and move on.\" He began to demonstrate."
quote: "\"But . . . wait. I can't tell what those programs are. How do you know whether you want to see something or not when you fly by so fast?\""
quote: "\"Absolutely. For example . . .\" He flicked to a new channel, offering his rationale as he went. \"Okay. This is obviously a commerical. My first glimpse tells me it's a feminine hygiene product. Unless I haven't had a date for three years, I'm gone.\""
quote: "\"Ditto for panty hose, toilet bowl cleaners, and Hallmark cards.\""
quote: "Matt skidded to a halt on the Braves game. \"Good question. I give a full two seconds to all sporting events.\" He watched Greg Maddux strike out Mike Piazza and then flicked past several other channels before continuing. \"I'll wait up to five seconds if Maddux is pitching, assuming I haven't already decided to watch the whole game.\""
quote: "\"Well, this is an art, not a science, so I could be a little bit off. But my longest stop is generally ten to fifteen seconds, max.\""
quote: "\"Oh, I've got it all right. We're talking Attention Deficit Disorder television. Whip right by, gather general impressions, and move on to the next thing. Sort of like your strategy for dealing with the opposite sex.\""
quote: "\"No, I don't pull punches, and I can't say I'm particularly interested in your approach to television. I don't watch much, but when I do I actually like to watch what I'm watching.\""
quote: "Matt smiled. \"Some people just don't have a light enough touch. I guess you're either born with it or you're not.\""
quote: "\"Some people are not only born with it, they're full of it.\""
quote: "\"All right. But don't say I didn't try to educate you.\" Matt laughed and handed her the remote. \"I have to go over a few things for tonight, and then I'm going to see what kind of meal I can put together. You ready to wash dishes for your supper?\""
quote: "\"And analyze you to boot. Just let me know when you want me to set the table.\""
quote: "Olivia changed her clothes before dinner. She also freshened her makeup, fluffed her hair, and dabbed perfume on every available scrap of skin—blatant acts of primping that both amused and horrified her. Unfortunately, amusement and horror weren't the only contradictory responses fighting for dominance within her."
quote: "She felt oddly relaxed but totally on edge. She was warm and liquid one moment and paralyzed by uncertainty the next. Extreme sensations bombarded her at every turn and left her feeling decidedly . . . not herself."
quote: "Dr. Olivia Moore lived her life in moderation. She kept her boat on an even keel. On those rare occasions when life made her boat heel to one side or another—her affair with Matt and her divorce from James being the most glaring examples—she found a way to right it, or at least pretended that she had."
quote: "Being trapped with Matt Ransom was like being sucked into the eye of a hurricane . . . and staying there. Indefinitely. While her sails flapped madly in the wind."
quote: "She had been right to be afraid of this promotion. She had too many unresolved feelings for Matt to come through this week unscathed. She should have kept her boat moored at the dock and refused to be pushed out to sea."
quote: "Olivia took a deep breath, opened the bedroom door, and stepped out. She found Matt chopping tomatoes in the kitchen and noticed that he, too, had spruced up for dinner. His hair was still wet from the shower, and his Levis, though well worn, were neatly pressed."
quote: "At her approach, Matt glanced up and smiled—a lazy flash of white teeth framed by dark skin. \"You're just in time.\""
quote: "The sound of his voice sent her pulse jumping—not a welcome reaction for a woman who craved calm waters. When he bent back over the cutting board, she took advantage of the opportunity to observe him. Her gaze traveled over the thick dark hair shot through with gray, down the slanted cheekbones to the squared-off jaw. His shoulders were broad, his forearms muscled, and the hands that wielded the paring knife, strong and sure."
quote: "Matt Ransom was a pleasure to look at. But watching him dissect the hapless tomato, Olivia admitted that his movie star looks were only a small part of his appeal."
quote: "She was drawn by his simple air of confidence and the keen intellect that fueled his wicked sense of humor. He made her laugh and sputter with indignation. And while he often infuriated her, he never bored her."
quote: "\"Are you going to stand there gawking, or are you going to get over here and set the table?\" He added the chopped tomato to the ingredients in a large wooden bowl and drizzled oil and vinegar over the top."
quote: "Olivia inhaled the rich scents emanating from the pot on the stove. \"Are we having spaghetti?\""
quote: "\"I've never met a region in Italy I didn't like.\""
quote: "\"Smart woman.\" He walked around the counter to fill two glasses with a deep red wine, and Olivia's heart did an embarrassing flip-flop."
quote: "Pretending a nonchalance she didn't feel, Olivia moved toward the silverware drawer. Trying to create distance where none existed, she hugged the counter, only to discover that opening the drawer put her directly in Matt's path."
quote: "\" 'Scuse me.\" Matt reached around her to check the sauce simmering on the stove."
quote: "Olivia sucked in her breath as his front brushed across her rear. \"God, I feel like a sardine.\""
quote: "\"No, you don't.\" A glimmer of humor stole into his eyes and a dimple flashed at the corner of his mouth. He put both hands up in apology as they slid out of each other's way, but he didn't look particularly sorry. \"Can you hand me a dish?\""
quote: "Olivia passed one of the two he'd set out and watched him place a heaping mound of spaghetti with meat sauce in the center. When he reached for the garlic bread wrapped in foil, his finger trailed across the still-hot burner. \"Damn.\""
quote: "\"I'm fine.\" With quick, efficient movements, he turned off the stove and stuck the singed finger in his mouth."
quote: "The look of surprise that flashed across his face made her want to laugh."
quote: "\"You say that now, but tomorrow morning I'll be hearing from attorneys and nurses. Let me take a look.\""
quote: "Intrigued enough by his reaction to stop worrying about her own, she followed him to the refrigerator. There he retrieved a block of Parmesan cheese and backed out, coming to a stop only when his rear end pressed up against her crotch."
quote: "It would have been comical if her heart hadn't been beating so hard. Matt turned around to face her—which didn't slow her heartbeat one iota—and then he reached over her to set the Parmesan on the counter, casually caging her between his forearms in the process."
quote: "Trapped against the wall of his chest, she became a part of every breath he took. And when he dropped his hands to cup her buttocks and pull her tighter against him, she could feel the hammer of his heartbeat against hers."
quote: "Her nerve endings jangled as he whispered in her ear. \"My finger's fine, but other parts of me could use some attention.\""
quote: "Olivia licked her lips, but her mouth was too dry to swallow. Something hard and insistent had sprung up between them. \"You don't say.\""
quote: "Matt nuzzled at her neck and brought his lips up to nibble on the lobe of her ear. \"I'm in love with the butter idea, Livvy. Why don't we put dinner on hold and adjourn to my room for some first aid?\""
quote: "\"We can sit down at the table, eat our spaghetti, and maintain this charade. Or we can skip dinner and get right down to dessert.\""
quote: "His look left no doubt who would be consuming whom."
quote: "Desire coursed through her as she stared up into Matt's eyes and tried to comprehend his effect on her. She could have been locked in a room half this size with her ex-husband and have no difficulty avoiding intimacy. Being on the same planet with Matt demanded it."
quote: "And what of Matt? Was this his standard reaction to an available member of the opposite sex? Or a convenient means of embarrassing her in front of her audience? How far would he go to do away with her as a competitor?"
quote: "When Olivia finally found her voice, she kept her words even and her tone light. It cost her, but she did it. \"I wouldn't miss your spaghetti for anything.\""
quote: "Turning away from him, she picked up their dinner plates. \"Why don't you bring the salads? And the rest of the wine, too. I think I need a drink.\""
quote: "Without a word, Matt followed her to the table. It took him a moment or two to seat himself, but once settled he raised his glass and clinked the rim of it against hers. \"To calmer heads prevailing.\""
quote: "She tilted her head in acknowledgment and swept away a tiny shard of disappointment. Then she took a bite of her spaghetti and chewed as calmly as she could, trying to enjoy the perfect blending of flavors on her tongue."
quote: "Only when she had herself completely under control did she allow herself to make eye contact. \"Tell me how you started cooking, Matt.\""
quote: "For a moment she thought he was going to refuse to follow her lead, but finally his lips quirked up at the corner and he said, \"Desperation. Hunger. The usual things that drive a person into a kitchen. Sometimes a man just has to learn to fend for himself.\""
quote: "Matt's smile disappeared and his body stiffened. \"She was at one time.\""
quote: "She could tell he didn't want to pursue the subject, but in her line of work that usually signaled the ideal time to forge ahead. \"But . . .\""
quote: "\"But when I was thirteen, we had a family crisis and she stopped.\""
quote: "She saw Matt's flash of regret at the honesty of his answer. He picked up his fork and started on his meal while she watched him from across the table. Funny that she had considered herself in love with him, yet knew so little about him."
quote: "He stopped eating, and she knew that if there'd been anywhere for him to go, he would have found an excuse to leave. He set his fork on the edge of his plate and looked at her. \"We had a death in the family.\""
quote: "\"I don't need your two hundred bucks' worth tonight, Olivia. Why don't you just do the dishes when we're finished, and leave my past alone?\""
quote: "He sat back in his chair and folded his arms across his chest. It didn't take a trained psychologist to read the body language. But she was glad she had the background all the same."
quote: "He reached out and picked up his wineglass. After several long sips he set it back down and looked her in the eye. \"My brother. Adam.\""
quote: "\"Oh, Matt.\" She felt a brief stab of pity for the boy who had lost so much at such an early age, but she forced herself to resume the conversation, carefully keeping the emotion out of her voice. \"Tell me what happened.\""
quote: "Matt ran a hand through his hair in a sign of irritation she was coming to recognize."
quote: "\"It happened so long ago, Olivia. I don't see any point in talking about it now.\""
quote: "She wondered if he had ever seen the point and hoped that some adult had known enough to make him share the hurt when the wounds were fresh. \"There doesn't need to be a point. Why don't you just tell me what happened?\""
quote: "His voice dropped lower and she leaned forward to hear what came next. \"We were all swimming in the lake near our house, and he hit his head on a boulder.\""
quote: "He seemed to expect her to say something, but she just sat quietly and waited for him to continue."
quote: "\"None of us realized what had happened until it was too late. I thought he was just horsing around.\""
quote: "\"Blamed themselves. Fell apart. I don't know, but they couldn't seem to whip up any real enthusiasm for the two of us who were still alive.\""
quote: "He stopped as if thinking about the answer for the first time, and she shuddered to think of the thirteen-year-old boy bottling up all that hurt and confusion. \"Lonely. Guilty. Scared. And totally pissed off.\""
quote: "He shrugged again. \"What does anybody do? I went on. It felt like shit, but I went on. And when my sister and I got tired of ordering pizza every night, we learned how to cook.\""
quote: "He snorted his amusement. \"Hardly. I had an aunt who bought my sister and me kids' cookbooks one year for Christmas. We learned how to make meatloaf and mashed potatoes—got really good at pigs in a blanket— that kind of thing. We used to take turns cooking dinner.\""
quote: "\"You didn't cook like this when we knew each other in Chicago. Where did you learn all the fancy stuff?\""
quote: "\"Ah, you didn't mention that during my remote lesson. So you also stop for . . .\""
quote: "\"Julia Child, when she had a regular show. Mario Batali, Paul Prudhomme, Emeril, Justin Wilson before he died, pretty much anyone standing in a kitchen who looks like they know what they're doing.\""
quote: "\"Oh, I'm a real man of mystery, all right.\" He sat back in his chair and studied her closely, so she studied him in return. His smile seemed a little freer, and his eyes were no longer so cautious."
quote: "He stood and carried the dishes to the sink and piled the pots and pans on the counter next to it. \"I appreciate your interest in my past and all, Olivia. But the next time I want to root around in the Ransom family closet, I'll let you know.\""
quote: "He came back to the table, pulled out her chair, and escorted her into the kitchen. \"In the meantime, you might want to get started on these dishes. I've got a show to get ready for.\""
quote: "From his seat in the WTLK control room, Charles Crankower watched Olivia Moore wash dishes. She looked almost as good from the back as she did from the front, and it was kind of interesting to watch the intensity with which she applied herself to cleaning those pots and pans."
quote: "His gaze swung to Matt Ransom, who was also watching the doctor, though he was pretending not to. After observing Ransom's progress over the last few days, Charles had to admit the guy hadn't overestimated his ability with women."
quote: "Charles wasn't certain yet just how to use this information to his or the station's advantage, but he recognized the significance of the omission. If their time together in Chicago hadn't meant anything to either of them, the whole world would already have known about it."
quote: "He'd caught their kiss on the couch and the way they kept rubbing up against each other in the kitchen. As he settled in to watch the evening unfold, Charles tried to imagine what, other than sex, two such opposite personalities might have shared. He crossed his long legs in an effort to get comfortable in the too-small chair and reminded himself that good things were supposed to come to those who waited."
quote: "Matt leaned way back in his chair and cleared a spot for his feet on the edge of the audio console. He missed his basketball net back at the studio and the freedom to move around without an audience studying his every move. And though he didn't plan to come out and say so anytime soon, he'd give huge sums of money for five minutes outside the too-tiny apartment."
quote: "His dinner with Olivia lingered in his mind, as did the unprecedented conversation about Adam and his death. It wasn't a topic he shared, and he wasn't thrilled at how easily she'd pried the details out of him. Or how much better he'd felt immediately afterward. She had a way of slipping past his defenses that was nothing short of alarming."
quote: "Dawg Rollins hung on the line wanting to talk, yet again, about his failed relationship and his inability to move on. Matt shook his head in disgust. Moving on was his specialty. In fact, he could pack up and hit the emotional road faster than most men could finish a burger and fries. As in most endeavors, practice made perfect."
quote: "\"Okay, I guess. Except I have a question for you.\""
quote: "\"Gee.\" Matt scratched his head and forced himself to think. \"I can't remember that ever happening. Is she unattractive?\""
quote: "\"Hell, no. She looks at me like I'm God's gift to the universe.\""
quote: "\"I don't know. She just doesn't do anything for me, ya know?\""
quote: "\"Not really.\" The memory of the first six months after he drove Olivia away rapped at the back of Matt's brain, but he refused to let it in. \"Are you still mooning after the one who wants to get married?\""
quote: "\"I'm not mooning after JoBeth. I just miss her, that's all.\""
quote: "\"Well, I'll tell you what, Dawg. You're just going to have to get over it. There's an old song that kind of covers this topic, called 'Love the One You're With.' Ever heard of it?\""
quote: "\"Well, that's my philosophy. If you can't be with the one you love—and you apparently can't unless you're willing to get married—then love the one you're with.\""
quote: "\"You're wasting time dwelling on what was, man. It's time to move on to what can be. Believe me, women are pretty much alike and not worth all this grief you're putting yourself through.\""
quote: "\"And you've never come up against a woman who made you rethink your philosophy?\""
quote: "Once again he quashed the image of Olivia so young and eager to share all of herself, opening to him completely. \"No, I haven't,\" he lied. \"But I am ready to move on to a more suitably masculine topic. Like the horrible end of the Braves' latest winning streak, or how to tell if you're about to get downsized.\""
quote: "Too old and too tired to get out of bed, Olivia stretched her sheep-clad arms up above her head, kicked the rumpled bedsheets out of the way, and contemplated the ceiling. It was made of the popcorned plaster common in condos and apartments, and it had absolutely nothing going for it. She felt a strange sort of kinship with the pimply slab of concrete and an awful sort of lethargy that she wished she could indulge."
quote: "In the bathroom, Olivia searched through her cosmetics bag until she came up with an ancient sample tube of anti-wrinkle cream. After smearing it liberally around her eyes, she faced herself in the mirror and attempted a smile. She still had all her teeth, but the longer she looked, the more pronounced the signs of her advanced age became."
quote: "Shimmying out of her pajamas, Olivia squeezed her eyes shut to avoid discovering any suddenly sagging body parts or newly bulging varicose veins, and stepped under the stream of hot water, keeping her back to the mirror while she lathered and rinsed."
quote: "Clean, but still thirty, she slipped into her clothes and headed out to the kitchen for the cup of coffee that she prayed would help put things back into perspective. Within minutes, she'd parked herself in front of the computer, coffee mug in hand. Diane's birthday wishes awaited her on the computer screen."
quote: "Diane gave her the vote count. Once again, donations and votes were relatively even. Olivia sensed it would take something major to obtain a real lead, but she refused to think about the consultant and his endless questions. Being thirty was bad enough."
quote: "There was the computer equivalent of dead silence while Olivia waited for the reassuring words to appear."
quote: "The doorbell and the phone rang simultaneously. With only ten minutes until air, Olivia picked up the cordless phone, brought the receiver to her ear, and moved toward the front door."
quote: "\"Crankower,\" he said, as if there were another. \"I just wanted you to know that I—\""
quote: "\"Hold on, Charles. There's someone at the door. I assume I'm allowed to open it?\""
quote: "Olivia turned the key in the dead bolt and pulled open the front door, an act that made her feel immeasurably better. Until she saw what awaited her."
quote: "\"I guess so.\" She stepped back to let him in and had an alarming thought. \"You haven't been paid to take off your clothes or anything, have you?\""
quote: "He looked at her as if she were deranged. \"Look, lady, I just want to put this stuff down. You want me to take my clothes off, you'll have to call my supervisor.\""
quote: "Olivia lifted the phone to her ear. \"Charles, what's going on here?\""
quote: "\"It's your thirtieth birthday, Olivia. The station wants to help you celebrate it.\""
quote: "The deliveryman continued to eye her as if she were exactly the sort of woman who might force him to perform an unauthorized striptease and then call his office to complain. \"I've got a few more things down near the elevator. Can you hold the door?\""
quote: "At her nod, he slid carefully around her and walked down the hall, leaving her with the phone and less than five minutes to air. She contemplated the hallway longingly."
quote: "The delivery guy came back with more flowers, a cane with a rearview mirror and horn attached, and two cardboard boxes with Matt's name on them. He eyed her as she stood in the doorway. \"I got some other stuff to do in here. You wanna close the door?\""
quote: "Olivia let the door slam behind her. \"Charles. I need to go on the air. You have to put a stop to this right now.\""
quote: "\"Sorry, Olivia, can't do it. Everything's already in motion. Just wanted to wish you a happy birthday.\""
quote: "\"There's lots of interest in the story of you turning thirty, so we'll be feeding a ton of video off the Webcam today.\""
quote: "She spent her last minutes before air watching the deliveryman decorate the apartment. He crisscrossed the room hanging black crepe paper and anchoring bunches of black balloons to chair backs while she watched with growing dismay."
quote: "When he started taping an \"Over the Hill\" banner to the wall, she wanted to go back to her room and crawl under the covers. Instead, she fielded her first call."
quote: "\"Happy birthday, Dr. O. Hope it's a great one.\""
quote: "Wanda sounded about twelve, which was probably why she still thought birthdays were something to cheer about. Olivia tried not to hold it against her, but caught herself listening with only half an ear as she watched the deliveryman/decorator pack up and depart."
quote: "So far, the one bright spot was Matt Ransom's absence. And though her gaze strayed to his closed bedroom door more times than she cared to count, she told herself she was relieved when he didn't put in an appearance."
quote: "Drawing the conversation with Wanda to a close, Olivia moved on. \"JoBeth. Has your Dawg learned to heel yet?\""
quote: "\"No, Dr. O. In fact, the last time I saw him, another woman had her paws all over him.\""
quote: "\"I told her she was welcome to the hound, and left. But I felt like rubbing both their noses in some serious—\""
quote: "\"Really. I know it's hard, JoBeth, but you're doing all the right things. You've taken control of your life, and you're prepared to move on if you have to. But, you know, I heard your Dawg on the air with Matt last night, and I'm starting to wonder if you might not be able to teach him some new tricks.\""
quote: "\"I don't know, Dr. Olivia. It doesn't look like he's going to roll over and play dead anytime soon. And I sure don't intend to sit up and beg.\""
quote: "Olivia smiled her first real smile of the day. Evidently even old people could still see the humor in things. \"Well, JoBeth, if we continue the obedience metaphor, we could say that the rolled-up newspaper made an impression. Now you have to decide whether to give him something to wag his tail about or get out the choke collar.\""
quote: "\"You know, a kind of Milk-Bones-versus-the-electronic-fence decision. You've got lots of options, JoBeth, you just need to take the time to sort through them.\""
quote: "\"Uh, okay, Dr. O, thanks. And happy birthday, you hear?\""
quote: "\"Thanks, JoBeth. Keep me posted. Who knows, maybe that Dawg can find his way back home.\""
quote: "Olivia shut off her microphone and stretched her arms over her head to work the kinks out. She stood and strolled over to the kitchen, then turned and walked back to stare out the balcony doors. Outside, a woman and young girl walked hand in hand toward the playground in the tiny park across the road. White dogwoods flowered along the sidewalk, and pale yellow roses twined through the arched park gate. Olivia longed to be out there with them, her own hair stirring in the gentle spring breeze."
quote: "She was thirty, and she was locked in a very small apartment with Matt Ransom. Somehow both truths loomed ominously over her, unavoidable and inescapable. Turning, she headed back to the audio console and took her seat just before the commercial break ended."
quote: "Glancing down at the computer screen, Olivia read the words \"dinner,\" \"birthday,\" and \"sorry.\" With no time to get more information, Olivia took the call. Despite the written warnings, Matt's voice took her by surprise."
quote: "\"Okay.\" She kept her voice even and professional, unwilling to let anyone know how completely he rattled her. \"Why don't you go ahead and tell me what's on your mind.\""
quote: "\"I'm calling because I have a birthday present for you, and I figure you're more likely to accept it with your listeners listening in.\""
quote: "\"A birthday dinner. In honor of your being so old and all.\""
quote: "\"What an attractive offer. Any chance we'd be dining out?\""
quote: "He chuckled with maddening good humor. \"See, this is where calling in to your show really pays off.\""
quote: "\"Yeah. Because I know you won't want your listeners to think you're afraid to have a birthday meal with me.\""
quote: "She could practically hear his shrug. \"Because you're older now, more mature? Possibly more . . . desperate?\" He paused and she could picture his dimple cutting a groove into his cheek. \"And you've never had my duck à la Ransom. It drives women wild.\""
quote: "\"Hey, Dawg.\" Noreen Pitts, who'd been waitressing longer than he'd been alive, tucked a pencil behind her ear and a stray gray curl back into its bun. \"Counter or booth?\""
quote: "\"I don't know, Dawg. Ina made chocolate meringue pie for dessert tonight. That's almost impossible to get out of your clothes.\""
quote: "\"I'm willing to risk it. Just give me that booth in the corner there, okay?\""
quote: "He moved forward with determination, dragging the small gray-haired woman along in his wake until they reached the booth he'd requested. When she didn't move, he lifted a menu out of her hands, sat down on the seat, and slid his rear end across the red vinyl bench."
quote: "\"I hope you feel that way when JoBeth gets finished with you.\" She shook her head. \"I don't know what's gotten into that girl, but she sure has taken to speaking her mind.\""
quote: "JoBeth had never been what you'd call a shrinking violet, but she'd never been the kind of woman to throw a pie in a man's face, either. Even when her parents' illnesses and demands had dragged down on her, she'd been upbeat, always trying to look on the bright side of things."
quote: "He took a minute to read over the menu, though he'd eaten at the Magnolia a thousand times. When he looked up, JoBeth stood in front of his table with her order pad out and her professional smile in place. Her normally warm gray eyes looked a bit on the frosty side."
quote: "\"You can't tie up a table talking.\" She nodded over her shoulder toward the entrance, where several customers milled around. \"People are lined up waiting to get seated.\""
quote: "\"I just wanted to tell you about the thing with Emmylou. You see I was only trying to—\""
quote: "\"It's no concern of mine who you spend your time with or why. Order or give up the table, Dawg.\""
quote: "\"All right, then. I'll start with a glass of sweet tea.\""
quote: "\"And?\" Her pencil still poised above her pad, JoBeth waited expectantly."
quote: "\"You told me I had to order, so I ordered. Is there a minimum?\" He sent her an innocent look."
quote: "She tucked the pencil back behind her ear and reached for his menu, but he refused to give it up."
quote: "\"I think I'll hold on to this. I'm going to be here awhile and I may want to order something else.\""
quote: "\"Fine.\" She turned and strode the few steps to the nearest station, grabbed up a pitcher, and returned to pour him the tea."
quote: "Dawg watched her pour the amber-colored liquid. \"You know, now that I think of it, maybe I will have a little something to eat. What do you have on special today?\""
quote: "JoBeth's lips pressed together in an impossibly thin line, and Dawg wondered how she'd squeeze the words out from between them. \"We have fried chicken, country fried steak, and liver and onions. They all come with mashed potatoes and gravy plus your choice of two vegetables.\""
quote: "JoBeth slipped her pencil back out from behind her ear and held it poised above her pad. \"What'll it be?\""
quote: "\"I guess I'll have a small house salad to start. Oh, and some corn bread. I may order a meal a little later.\""
quote: "\"Fine.\" JoBeth turned on her heel and left. He watched her work her tables, taking full advantage of the chance to observe her in action. She was small and compact with lots of interesting curves that he'd spent long hours exploring. He watched her flash her sassy smile at the elderly McCauleys and heard her laughter float back across the diner as she took someone else's order. She had so much life and enthusiasm—but evidently no desire to share either with him at the moment."
quote: "Dawg took a long sip of his tea and reflected that his whole life had turned damned empty since she'd moved out. There wasn't a thing he could think of that felt the same."
quote: "JoBeth placed his salad in front of him and slid the basket of corn bread onto the middle of the table. A bowl of butter pats clattered next to it. In a minute she'd be gone."
quote: "\"Nicky and the other boys all asked me to say hello to you,\" he got out in a rush."
quote: "\"Oh.\" She'd already turned to leave, but stopped at the mention of the inner-city baseball team he coached. \"Did you have practice?\""
quote: "\"Yeah. We had the batting cage for an hour and then we played a practice game against Ron Parker's team yesterday afternoon.\""
quote: "JoBeth smiled. The fact that she so obviously didn't want to made it that much sweeter. \"Did Jamal get a hit?\""
quote: "\"Almost. I just can't convince the kid to swing unless the pitch is exactly where he wants it.\""
quote: "She smiled again and her eyes warmed by several degrees. \"Bet he's sorry his coach played for the Falcons instead of the Braves. Did you take that knee pad I bought you so you could get down into his strike zone?\""
quote: "Dawg congratulated himself on finding the one topic guaranteed to snag JoBeth's interest. As unofficial team mom and number one fan, JoBeth had rarely missed a Fuller Park Tornadoes game."
quote: "\"The boy has about a one-foot strike zone. He's like you, JoBeth, small and scrappy. I like that in a woman.\""
quote: "\"Hmmph. You didn't seem to have a problem with big and blonde the other night.\" The thawing process screeched to a halt and JoBeth whirled to leave."
quote: "Dawg's knees might have been shot, but there was nothing wrong with his reflexes. His hand snaked out to wrap around her wrist and twirl her back to face him. \"You know I was only trying to make you jealous.\""
quote: "She cocked her head and waited for him to continue."
quote: "\"Of course, I know you didn't fall for it. You did leave both of us alive.\""
quote: "JoBeth tapped a foot in a sign of impatience, but he knew he had her full attention."
quote: "\"Aw hell, JoBeth. I'm not interested in Emmylou or anyone else. You do know that, don't you?\""
quote: "\"Hmmph,\" was all she said, but he could tell she was pleased. She snatched her hand away and headed for a nearby table, but her movements were noticeably looser and her shoulders didn't seem so stiff."
quote: "He reached for a warm piece of corn bread, broke it open, and drenched it with butter. As he munched on his salad, he propped the menu in front of him and began to study the possibilities. It was a good thing he hadn't eaten much today. If he was going to hold on to his table until closing time, he had a hell of a lot of food ahead of him."
quote: "\"Hmm?\" Matt looked up from the duck breast medallions he was preparing, to find Olivia contemplating him from the couch."
quote: "\"I used to make fun of daytime television. I never really had the time for it, and most of the talk show hosts are really just there to entertain, you know?\""
quote: "She ignored his dig and continued rhapsodizing. \"But she has heart. You can tell she really wants to help people and change their lives for the better.\""
quote: "She looked surprised at the compliment, as if he could have been observing her all this time and not been aware that she was genuinely motivated to help."
quote: "\"I'm sure there're openings in Oprah's fan club. Maybe you should consider joining.\""
quote: "\"No, I won't. You're serious enough for the both of us. Besides, it's your birthday. You're required to have fun.\""
quote: "Matt pulled the white asparagus out of the refrigerator and began rinsing them. \"If you could do anything you chose today, what would it be?\""
quote: "He leered at her, and waggled his eyebrows for good measure. \"There are lots of things we could do here.\""
quote: "\"Right. And how many of them don't involve taking our clothes off?\""
quote: "Olivia speared him with a look and then turned her attention back to Oprah. Watching her, Matt was pleased to see evidence of the success of his relaxation campaign. Where before she would have been sitting upright, her back barely touching the back of the sofa, she now lounged on the couch with the remote in her hand. Though she didn't yet use it enough to satisfy him, she no longer treated it like a foreign object. And that wasn't the only change he'd initiated."
quote: "He'd influenced her dress code, too. At the beginning of the week, she'd been painfully starched and perfectly turned out. Today, her blonde hair was slicked back into a ponytail, and the feet that poked out under the faded jeans were bare—except for the shocking-pink toenails. Her T-shirt proclaimed, \"Liv Lives Live on WTLK,\" and fit tight enough to outline her shapely breasts very nicely."
quote: "Matt ran his eyes along the luscious curves, remembering the heft and feel of them in his hands, until his body began to react to the images."
quote: "He worked in silence for a while, intrigued by Oprah's interview with a father who stayed home with quadruplets while his wife went out to work—a premise that zapped his erection in a matter of seconds. As he listened, he caught himself wondering whether quadruplets shared the same kind of bond that twins did, or if it somehow lessened when divided among a greater number of siblings."
quote: "His own connection with his twin, Adam, had been so strong that the severing of it had crippled him for years. Even now the hollow spot deep at his center remained, and he expended considerable energy protecting the vulnerable core."
quote: "Only Olivia refused to leave his memories and guilt undisturbed, and the more she prodded and pushed, the greater the possibility that she'd discover the emptiness yawning inside him—something he'd never allowed another soul to see."
quote: "He was beginning to question whether he could tempt Olivia, put her off kilter, and take advantage of her confusion, without damaging himself. This softening he felt toward her worried him, and so did his audience's potential reaction; Olivia's wasn't the only image the consultant would put under a microscope."
quote: "Matt peeled potatoes and put them on to boil. A few minutes later, Olivia clicked off the television and wandered into the kitchen, ambling toward him at a leisurely pace he'd never seen her use before."
quote: "Matt smiled to himself. Given a few more days, he'd have her sleeping until noon and wandering around the apartment in her jammies—preferably the sheep ones that covered everything and drove him right toward the edge of sanity."
quote: "She took a seat on a barstool directly across from him. Without asking, he opened a bottle of the Veuve Cliquot he'd had delivered and poured them each a glass."
quote: "\"Happy birthday, Olivia. I hope the next thirty are even better than the first.\""
quote: "She snorted inelegantly, but lifted her glass of champagne to clink against his. \"To my advanced age. May it make me wiser in all things.\" She looked him in the eye. \"May I learn from my mistakes . . . and know better than to repeat them.\""
quote: "\"I think I'll just stick to 'Happy birthday.' \" Matt raised the glass to his lips and took a long sip. Olivia did the same. \"Do you have any plans for the rest of the afternoon?\""
quote: "Her glass halted midway to her lips. \"I'm considering something really different—like hanging around and killing time.\""
quote: "\"Why not take a nap? You're going to need your strength to consume the meal I'm putting together.\""
quote: "\"Um-hmm. With a nice long soak in the tub afterward.\""
quote: "\"You can have the bath all to yourself. You can even leave your clothes on if you insist.\" He smiled. \"Of course, it's a lot more relaxing and you get a whole lot cleaner naked.\""
quote: "She laughed then, her eyes taking on the richness of cut green velvet. His laugh joined hers as his mind formed a picture of Olivia squishing out of the bath, with bubbles dripping from her clothes. Then there was an awkward silence while he pictured her stepping out of that same tub completely naked with tiny droplets of water clinging to her. . . ."
quote: "\"Oh, um, yeah. Sure.\" He cleared his throat and lifted the champagne to top off their glasses. \"I was just thinking about some things I need to go over with Ben. I want to prep for my show before we sit down for dinner.\""
quote: "\"Why don't you go ahead and take an hour's snooze, Livvy? I'll have your bath drawn and waiting for you at six-thirty so you can be nice and relaxed for your birthday dinner.\""
quote: "Continuing the imitation, he put his palm under Olivia's to cup her hand so that he could drop a kiss on the outside of her wrist."
quote: "Olivia knew deep shit when she soaked in it. It might be disguised as hot water frothing with perfume-scented bubbles, but it smelled like trouble all the same. Incredibly, she'd slept for more than the allotted hour and would probably be sleeping now if not for Matt."
quote: "He'd banged on her bedroom door until she finally forced herself out of bed to open it, and then with a finesse that spoke of too much experience, he'd led her to the bathroom and presented her with the promised bubble bath."
quote: "So here she sat, her hair piled on top of her head, soaking her naked self, nibbling on fresh strawberries and sipping a fresh glass of champagne. She'd never felt more pampered or more suspicious in her life."
quote: "Olivia swirled a hand through the water, idly watching the bubbles slide across her skin. They parted and reunited around her, while the warm water caressed her to the bone. She knew Matt was up to something, something undoubtedly fueled by her food donation and votes jump after this morning's show, but it was hard to keep up one's guard when one felt as wonderfully lethargic as she did right now."
quote: "The juice of an especially plump strawberry trickled down the corner of her mouth, and Olivia licked it off with her tongue, enjoying the sweet stickiness."
quote: "She trailed the washcloth lightly over her body, down one leg and up her belly to pass across a hardening nipple as she imagined sharing the steamy tub with Matt. Weightless, she floated in the warmth, her body tingling. Slowly, she drew the cloth over her breasts and felt an accompanying ache begin to build deep within her belly."
quote: "Closing her eyes, she sank deeper under the water, drew her knees up, and skimmed the washcloth slowly up between her thighs. The water-weighted cloth pressed against her, and she gave herself up to the sensation, imagining Matt in the tub with her. . . ."
quote: "Olivia dropped the washcloth and sat up in the tub. \"I'm good.\""
quote: "She imagined her audience's reaction if she were to open the bathroom door, reach an arm out, and drag Matt inside so that she could have her way with him."
quote: "\"Do you want some more champagne? I could top your glass off if you'd like.\""
quote: "She wanted to yell, \"Fill her up,\" and knew she wouldn't be referring to her glass. Lying here naked with Matt a mere doorknob-turn away was doing funny things to her insides. And her brain. This was not good. \"Um, no thanks. I'll be out soon.\""
quote: "With water cascading down her body, she stood and wrapped herself in a towel."
quote: "When he didn't respond, Olivia released the drain lever with one toe and stepped out of the tub. Opening the bathroom door, she peeked out to make sure the coast was clear, and finding the hallway empty, she tip-toed the few steps to her room."
quote: "She dressed quickly but with care—repinning her hair into a smoother French twist and applying both eyeliner and mascara along with a swipe of blush high on both cheekbones. Then she painted her lips poppy pink and stepped into a fitted black halter dress."
quote: "Dropping the hem of the dress back into place, she stopped to study her reflection in the mirror. Outwardly, nothing seemed different. On the outside, she looked like the calm and collected Dr. Olivia Moore; but inside, under the black satin thong, she felt sexy and wanton and someone else entirely—a dangerous dichotomy unlikely to work to her advantage."
quote: "Olivia frowned at her thirty-year-old reflection. Subdued and decorous would see her through the evening far more safely than wild and uninhibited, and if she knew what was good for her, Matt would never suspect what she wore beneath the folds of her dress."
quote: "At his first glimpse of her, Matt's eyes lit up, and he gave an appreciative whistle. \"Wow. There must have been something pretty potent in those bath bubbles.\""
quote: "Olivia blushed as she remembered just how potent those bubbles had been. \"It felt great, Matt. I never would have thought of it on my own.\""
quote: "He looked surprised by the admission, but then smiled, obviously pleased. \"Here, have some more champagne while I go shower and change. I seem to smell a little more like dinner than I intended.\" He sent her a cheeky glance and an exaggerated wink. \"Wouldn't want you to get confused about what to chomp down on first.\""
quote: "\"Nope. But you can put some music on if you'd like. I'll be back in a flash.\""
quote: "\"Fair enough. If I'm not back before the timer goes off, the hors d'oeuvres are all yours.\""
quote: "Olivia sipped champagne and wandered around the room. With a small wave to the Webcam, she knelt down next to the CD player and rifled through the CDs Matt had brought with him, surprised to discover how closely his taste mirrored hers."
quote: "The black balloon bouquets and \"Over the Hill\" sign still drew her gaze, but with a little effort she managed to focus on the flower arrangements instead. Matt had moved one of them to the center of the kitchen table, which he'd set for two."
quote: "Olivia stopped in front of the small mirror on the foyer wall and glared at her reflection. \"Okay, you. Repeat after me,\" she commanded. \"Do not touch the chef under any circumstances. Do not get any closer to him than absolutely necessary. And whatever you do, don't drink too much.\""
quote: "Olivia picked up her wineglass and took another long, soothing sip. Her nerves vibrated just under her skin, and the only thing that seemed to interrupt the hum was the ingestion of wine—a very temporary fix that required constant repetition and put a great big hole in her plan to keep her distance."
quote: "So far she'd maintained the maximum clearance possible given the shortage of space, but she'd caught the amused look on Matt's face enough times now to suspect he knew just how hard she was working to keep it that way. Worse, it was becoming increasingly difficult to remember just why maintaining that distance was so important."
quote: "Somewhere along the way, they'd finished the second bottle of champagne and started on the burgundy Matt had insisted would complement the upcoming meal. Smoothing the hem of her dress over her knees, she sat up straighter on her barstool and made a stab at conversation. \"Is this spanakopita?\""
quote: "Matt picked up one of the triangles of puffed pastry and popped it into his mouth. \"Umm-hmm. The Greek deli near the station sent them over as a birthday treat for you. Actually, a lot of our advertisers are wanting in on your thirtieth birthday.\""
quote: "\"I can't tell you what aging before a national audience does for a woman's ego.\""
quote: "\"Just think of yourself as a fine wine, Olivia. You're becoming richer, more full-bodied.\""
quote: "Funny, how his voice could go all hot and sexy without any warning like that. Olivia lifted her wineglass, drained it in one long swallow, and felt the resulting warmth seep through her."
quote: "She tried to figure out why he was being so charming, but her brain didn't seem to be up to the task. The warmth infused her and began to seep outward to her limbs."
quote: "\"No cracks? No jokes about my age? Just 'You're like a fine wine'?\""
quote: "\"Me? Make jokes about your age?\" He smiled. \"I happen to think the wine analogy fits. You were cute at twenty-one, Olivia, but you wear thirty very well.\" His gaze swept over her, and her flesh reacted as if it were his fingers that trailed across it."
quote: "Looking for a distraction, Olivia picked up the bottle of wine sitting on the counter and poured herself another glass."
quote: "Spellbound, she watched his large, capable hands arrange the duck breast medallions on the plate. His fingers were long and supple, and for a moment she allowed herself to remember the feel of them skimming over her skin, urging her on to places she'd never been before or since. She took a gulp of wine and watched him place whipped garlic potatoes and blanched white asparagus next to the duck."
quote: "\"Wow,\" she said. \"I feel like I'm in a five-star restaurant.\""
quote: "\"Only zee best for zee birthday girl.\" He winked and nodded her toward the table. \"If you'll bring the wine and our glasses, we can get started.\""
quote: "Olivia picked up the half-empty bottle in one hand and her own mysteriously empty glass in the other. She felt warm and wonderful and increasingly comfortable with the glow that enveloped her. Being thirty felt considerably less traumatic than it had that morning."
quote: "She unfolded the napkin, laid it in her lap, and scooted her chair in closer to the table. When she looked up, her wineglass was once again full, and Matt was passing a basket of rolls in her direction."
quote: "Since her mouth was dry, Olivia took a small sip of wine to facilitate swallowing, and when he continued to study her, she took another."
quote: "Dragging her gaze from his, Olivia turned her attention to her plate. Her knife sliced easily through the duck's butter-soft breast, and she lifted the first forkful to her mouth while Matt watched. The exquisite mingling of port wine sauce and smoky duck flooded over her tongue to tease her taste buds, and she forgot all about Matt for a moment while she lost herself in the sensation."
quote: "\"Mmmm.\" Eyes closed, Olivia savored the perfectly blended flavors, enjoying the taste that lingered in her mouth even after she swallowed. \"God, that's good.\""
quote: "She opened her eyes to see him light up at the compliment, and she couldn't help noticing how the candlelight added depth and shadow to the already arresting planes and angles of his face."
quote: "\"Glad you like it. I've always been partial to duck, though it can be a bit tricky.\""
quote: "\"Well, you've certainly mastered this one.\" She took another sip of wine and continued to meet his gaze full-on. His eyes were like two tumblers of whiskey, amber brown and ready to drown in. She felt a delicious tightening deep in her belly that had nothing to do with digestion, and she felt her hazy glow expand in size to encompass them both."
quote: "They ate in silence for a few moments, but the silence was mostly companionable, if you didn't count the depth charges going off in her stomach."
quote: "Matt lifted his wineglass and took a drink. His didn't seem to be going empty anywhere near as often as hers was, and she wondered idly if his glow was keeping pace with hers."
quote: "\"His name was, I mean his name is, James.\" She eyed her wineglass and the untouched tumbler of ice water sitting next to it, torn."
quote: "Olivia reached for the wine. \"I've been living with you for five days now, Matt; I know you read the newspapers. Surely you know the whole sordid tale.\""
quote: "\"I tend to read news, not gossip columns. Why don't you tell me what happened?\""
quote: "She took a sip of wine and finished the last of her potato before dabbing at the corner of her mouth with her napkin. \"It wasn't anything out of the ordinary. Just your usual unwelcome brush with infidelity.\""
quote: "She watched him watch her and was surprised to find no smirk on his face or laughter in his eyes."
quote: "\"So everything was great and then, boom, out of the blue he's sleeping with someone else?\""
quote: "Funny that no one had ever asked her that question before. Even she had avoided looking too closely at what had come before the unavoidable knowledge of the affair. Good old dependable unexciting James, chosen because he seemed the direct antithesis of both her father and Matt, had turned out to be so not what she had expected."
quote: "\"No, I just wasn't paying attention.\" Because she'd been so busy burying herself in work and trying not to admit that supposedly safe and solid added up to dull and boring. \"I'm a therapist. I help other people find answers, but I seem stupendously unable to do the same for myself.\""
quote: "She took another swig of wine and told herself that the warmth in Matt's eyes was also wine induced. Still, she felt something stir between them. \"It would appear I'm somehow not enough for the men in my life.\""
quote: "\"Ah, Livvy. You're more than enough for any man. You've just had the misfortune to attract selfish oafs who can't leave you alone even when they know they should.\""
quote: "\"Hmmph.\" A lethargy invaded her limbs and she couldn't seem to tear her gaze from his face. It was a fine face, good and true and strong. And at the moment it was completely focused on her. \"My mother hasn't been enough for my father for almost thirty years now, which makes me think it might be hereditary.\""
quote: "She blinked and looked at her wineglass, aghast at the truths slipping out of her mouth, and unable to comprehend how her glass could be empty again. She reached for the bottle, intent on maintaining the warm, hazy glow that had wrapped so snugly around them, but Matt put a hand on top of hers."
quote: "\"I can't believe I'm saying this, Olivia, but maybe you should take it a little easier on the wine.\""
quote: "She tingled at his touch. \"You think I've had too much to drink?\""
quote: "\"I know you've had more than you're used to.\""
quote: "\"Never felt more in control in my life,\" she said. She tried to wink at him, but her facial features no longer seemed to work independently. \"You should consider going into counseling. You're not bad to talk to.\""
quote: "\"Now I know you've had too much.\" His smile caused her heart to perform a funny sort of flip-flop. Her limbs felt too heavy for her body, and she could hear a loud whooshing in her ears, which seemed to be the blood rushing through her brain."
quote: "\"Except for JoBeth's boyfriend. You're making a real mess of that.\""
quote: "\"Am I now?\" He didn't seem at all upset by her criticism. In fact, his voice felt as warm and wonderful as a caress."
quote: "Olivia picked up her empty wineglass and tilted it around, searching for something to drink. She eyed the little that was left in the bottle with disappointment. \"Are you going to drink that last bit?\""
quote: "She squinted her eyes to try to get rid of the extra Matt swaying in her line of vision, as the roaring in her ears grew louder. Lifting her napkin to dab daintily at her lips, she somehow jammed it into the side of her nose, then stared at the napkin in confusion as it drifted out of her fingers and fluttered to the floor."
quote: "\"Oops.\" That definitely couldn't be her giggling, because she detested women who giggled. Enunciating very carefully in an effort to maintain some semblance of dignity, she said, \"Can you excuse me for just a minute? I seem to have dropped something.\""
quote: "Matt watched her disappear, and for a minute or two he sat and chewed, assuming she'd surface when she found her napkin. By the time he finished his last bite of potato, it occurred to him that she might be injured or unable to get up."
quote: "Since his back was already to the Webcam, he slid his chair back and lowered himself to the floor, out of camera range, where he found Olivia sitting beneath the table, her napkin in her lap."
quote: "\"Absolutely.\" She waved the napkin airily at him but made no move to get up."
quote: "\" 'S'okay. I don't feel usual.\" Her smile was crooked and went straight to his heart."
quote: "As he took in the surprising sensation, she got on all fours and crawled over to sit beside him. She sat so close he could feel the shallowness of her breathing and read the intention in her wine-clouded green eyes even before she tilted her lips up toward his."
quote: "She kissed him, and his entire body hardened. Without thought he reached out and pulled her closer."
quote: "Looping her arms around his neck, she crawled into his lap, where she pressed her breasts against his chest."
quote: "She took his hand in hers and guided it up under her dress, where he discovered just how little separated him from the place he most wanted to be."
quote: "He groaned. \"Tell me you're not wearing the thong.\""
quote: "\"Sorry,\" she breathed in his ear, though it was clear she wasn't. \"Didn't mean for you to know.\""
quote: "He ran his hands over the smoothly rounded buttocks, down the silky thighs, and back up to cup the triangle between her legs. With his thumb he manipulated the sliver of satin until she moaned and the strip of material grew damp."
quote: "Hot and hard, Matt went up on his knees to bring their bodies closer together and banged his head against the kitchen table—knocking some sense into his lust-filled brain."
quote: "\"Olivia.\" With his lips welded to hers, his voice was muffled, and he had to open his mouth wider to try again. At which point she slipped her tongue through the opening to search for his."
quote: "\"This is not a good idea.\" He must have hit his head harder than he'd realized, because that seemed to be his voice sounding the note of reason."
quote: "Olivia didn't bother to respond verbally, but her non-verbal responses couldn't have been clearer. Her thumb traced the curve of his ear, while her tongue found and parried with his. Her breasts splayed across his chest, their hardened nipples pressing intimately against him, until all he could think of was pushing her onto her back and driving himself inside her. Under the table. In the middle of the kitchen. With an Internet audience wondering where in the hell they'd gone."
quote: "He stared down into the trusting green eyes and groaned inwardly. \"Olivia, we need to stop this right now.\""
quote: "\"But I want you,\" she mumbled, somehow managing to sound more sad than surprised. \"Always wanted you.\""
quote: "He saw her eyes lose their focus and watched her head tilt sideways. Then she yawned, tucked her head up against his chest like a kitten seeking comfort, and went completely limp in his arms."
quote: "Some of the starch went out of him then, too. The pounding of his heart slowed, the heat that possessed him cooled, and the throbbing in his loins dulled to a mild ache. He stroked her hair and dropped a kiss onto the silken top of her head. As she snuggled more tightly against his chest, he gathered her in close."
quote: "JoBeth stopped beside Dawg's table. Reaching into the pocket of her apron, she asked, \"What'll it be? I've got Zantac, Pepcid AC, or the old standby.\" She dropped a packet of Alka-Seltzer onto the tabletop."
quote: "\"Don't see why not. You've had everything else on the menu.\""
quote: "Dawg put a fist to his mouth and belched discreetly. \"That I have, darlin'. And I have to admit I'm a mite full.\""
quote: "\"Dawg Rollins, you were ready to explode two hours ago. I've never seen a man pack away that much food in one sitting.\""
quote: "\"That's what desperation'll do for you. Thank God you're off the clock. I don't think I could have held that table for another minute.\""
quote: "\"Well, Ina's bound to wonder what's going on, but I doubt she'll complain about a ticket this big. I've got a doggie bag packed for you to take home.\" She grinned evilly as she pressed the brown paper sack into his hands. \"In case you get hungry in the middle of the night or something.\""
quote: "They walked together out into the empty parking lot, and JoBeth looked around in confusion. Her car sat under the streetlamp where she always parked when she worked nights, and the cook's battered pickup sat a few spaces from it, but there was no sign of Dawg's bright red Jeep."
quote: "She eyed him suspiciously. \"You don't look like a man who thinks his ride has been stolen. What's going on?\""
quote: "\"Now don't get that angry tone going, JoBeth. I knew I wasn't leaving the diner without you, and I didn't see any reason to juggle cars.\""
quote: "\"All I'm hoping for is a chance to talk, JoBeth. I spent more than six hours eating; don't you think I've earned the right to be heard?\""
quote: "JoBeth took out the keys to her twelve-year-old Cadillac. \"Fine. I'll drive while you talk. But don't even be thinking romance.\""
quote: "\"Get real, woman. I've been eating for six hours, I don't have a romantic inkling in my body.\""
quote: "He held the driver's door open for her like he always did, and JoBeth brushed by him to take her seat. Outwardly she remained cool, but her insides felt all warm and gooey. The man had eaten a refrigeratorful of food just to be near her; in her book it didn't get much more romantic than that."
quote: "The Cadillac caught on the second try, and JoBeth gave it a little extra gas before putting it into gear."
quote: "\"Don't forget to take the car in to Joe for servicing. He told me he thought he could take care of that starter for you.\""
quote: "She drove through the parking lot to Magnolia, where she took a left and merged into traffic. Even at this time of night, people in Atlanta seemed to be on the run. She flipped the radio on to WTLK, and for a startling moment Matt Ransom's voice filled the car. She grimaced, and when Dawg didn't comment, she turned the radio off. The last thing she wanted to hear right now was whatever stupid thing Ransom might have to say."
quote: "She drummed her fingers on the steering wheel. \"So. What did you wait so many hours to tell me, Dawg? It's late, and I'm ready to call it a night.\""
quote: "\"I thought it might be time to talk about marriage.\""
quote: "JoBeth's heart slammed into her chest. Was this the conversation she'd been waiting for all this time? She smoothed her hair behind her ears and licked her suddenly dry lips."
quote: "JoBeth exhaled the breath she'd been holding and felt her shoulders slump. That didn't sound like the beginning of any marriage proposal she'd ever heard of."
quote: "\"I've never talked too much about my marriage to Suzy. I don't even like to think about it. But you need to understand why I feel the way I do.\""
quote: "Dawg kept his eyes on the road in front of them. When she looked over at him, all she could see was the strong beak of a nose with its extra bump, and the careful set of his lips."
quote: "\"I was just out of college when I got married. I'd made a name for myself at the University of Georgia, and all I could see ahead was a life of football and more millions than a man can count. With a woman who loved me by my side.\""
quote: "JoBeth heard the hurt in his voice and wondered which loss bothered him more, the woman or the career."
quote: "\"It all started out great. You know I ended up here in Atlanta with the Falcons. Had a big church wedding. Suzy found us a house and decorated it, gave parties, met up with me on the road. She loved being the wife of a professional football player.\""
quote: "JoBeth sat silent, her eyes on the road before her, her attention focused completely on Dawg."
quote: "\"Then I got my knee stomped on during that game in Miami. I knew it was over even before they carried me off the field.\" He shook his head at the memory. \"My professional career lasted one year and one week—must be one of the shortest in NFL history. And my marriage didn't even make it two months more than that.\""
quote: "\"Adjust?\" His voice rang with disgust. \"She never even tried to adjust. She married a professional athlete, and I wasn't one anymore. She hung around just long enough for the doctors to confirm I'd never play again, then she hitched her star to another player's wagon.\""
quote: "JoBeth reached a hand out to squeeze Dawg's. She wanted to pull him against her breast and stroke his poor head until he felt better, but she managed to resist."
quote: "\"I swore then that I wouldn't make the same mistake twice. I've told you that I love you, JoBeth. I've told you more times than I've ever told any woman. You have to know that it's true.\""
quote: "\"You have. And I'm not accusing you of lying. But it's just not enough anymore.\""
quote: "She pulled up in front of Dawg's house and put the car in park, letting the engine idle in the early morning darkness. She'd thought she'd spend the rest of her days in this house with Dawg, imagined raising their children there together. She fought back the moisture pressing against her eyelids and drew a long, shaky breath."
quote: "\"I love you, too, Dawg. But I can't waste any more time or breath trying to convince you that I'm worth marrying. If you can't tell the difference between me and Suzy, then that's your loss.\""
quote: "She tilted her face out of his grasp and turned to look out the windshield, unable to stare into the blue of his eyes a second longer."
quote: "He reached out a hand to turn her face back toward his, and she forced herself to shrug it off."
quote: "\"All right, then, let's just start fresh,\" he said. \"Let me take you out tomorrow afternoon. We can go shoot some pool and have a pizza at Mario's afterward, just like we did on our first date. All I'm asking for is time.\""
quote: "JoBeth turned to face him then, forcing herself to look him square in the eye, steeling herself against the turbulence that she saw. She summoned all her resources to keep her voice steady, though she couldn't totally eliminate the quiver of regret. \"I'm not available tomorrow, Dawg. I've accepted a date with someone else, and I think it would be best if we said our goodbyes now.\""
quote: "\"Well, if that doesn't beat all.\" He drew his hand back and ran it through his close-cropped blond hair. \"Here I am dredging my guts up to try to make you understand where I'm coming from, and you're going out with someone else.\""
quote: "His eyes narrowed. \"This is a payback for Emmylou, isn't it?\""
quote: "\"No. It's not a payback. It's a date. Period. If we're not going to be together, then we need to look for people better suited to what we want.\""
quote: "\"Right.\" He opened the car door and slid out, leaning back in through the open window after he slammed the Cadillac door shut. \"I guess that's it then. You go your way and I'll go mine.\""
quote: "It all sounded so logical and correct. So why did she feel so crummy? And why did the expression on Dawg's face make her want to climb out of the car and wrap her arms around his great hulk of a body?"
quote: "He stood there for what felt like forever and ended up being nowhere near long enough. Then he tapped his fist on the hood of the car and offered her a crooked smile. \"You'd best go on then, JoBeth. 'Cause if you stay here a minute longer, I'm going to carry you up to the house and have my way with you. You know that, don't you?\""
quote: "She closed her eyes and tried to swallow back the feelings his words dredged up in her. She couldn't think of anything she wanted more than to feel his big hands move over her in that surprisingly gentle way he had. She craved the completion that came when he eased himself deep inside her and made her whole. She longed to give in and feel all those things one more time. But even as she had the thought, she knew that if she allowed him to lay so much as a finger on her, she'd never find the strength to leave."
quote: "She slipped the transmission into drive, blinked back a fresh crop of tears, and whispered, \"You take care of yourself now, Dawg. You hear?\""
quote: "No,\" Matt said for the hundredth time. \"Olivia just did a little too much celebrating. I'm sure she'll be fine by morning.\""
quote: "Amazing how preoccupied his listeners were with Olivia's well-being. Virtually every one of his callers had inquired after her health or begged for intimate details. They'd all either seen or heard about the proper Dr. Moore \"unbending\" on her milestone birthday; but while her dignity might have suffered slightly, her reputation was still intact. And it was his own damn fault."
quote: "Only he had witnessed the determination with which she crawled into his lap and her all-too-successful efforts to rouse him. And then when he'd had the chance to turn the camera on her and squash her once and for all, what had he done? Covered for her, that's what. He'd acted like she was ill and carted her off to bed, going so far as to come right back out of her room so there'd be no speculation. What the hell was wrong with him?"
quote: "For four long hours, he bantered with callers while he fought off images of Olivia in the black satin thong. Finally it was time to sign off and he was able to turn the controls over to Ben."
quote: "Still on headphones, he started to pack up his things."
quote: "\"Great show, Matt,\" said Ben. \"I haven't been able to get anything out of T.J. or the consultant about what the research is saying, but I'm sure this show will put us back on top with the popular vote.\""
quote: "\"Yeah.\" Ben cleared his throat. \"Speaking of 'fired up,' do you really think Dr. O is okay?\""
quote: "\"I'm sure she'll be her old bushy-tailed self by morning.\" Matt started to remove his headphones."
quote: "\"But nobody's heard a peep out of her since you . . . since nine-thirty. Aren't you going to check on her?\""
quote: "Actually, Matt was planning to do exactly that, though he doubted Olivia would appreciate anyone knowing it. \"Didn't anyone ever tell you you're too young to be such a worrywart?\""
quote: "\"I think one or two people may have mentioned it.\" Ben's voice turned conspiratorial. \"Do you want me to adjust the camera so you can check without everybody knowing?\""
quote: "\"Well, the camera's remote is here in the control room. Crankower monitors it a lot of the time, and all of the producers are supposed to keep an eye out during their shifts. All you've got is the power cable.\""
quote: "Hmmm. The power cable. The old on, off. Matt stroked his chin and thought about the possibilities. \"Thanks for the offer, man, but I'm sure Olivia's fine. I'm going to unwind a little bit, and then I'll probably just call it a night.\""
quote: "Matt shot his most innocent look up at the camera lens as he took off his headphones. Then, to throw off anyone who might be watching, he puttered around for a while."
quote: "He blew out the candles still flickering on the table and poked around the kitchen long enough to bore to tears anyone watching. Then he stretched out on the couch and read for another thirty minutes, almost putting himself to sleep in the process."
quote: "When he had a sizable loop around his shoe, he turned away from the armoire, stepped forward, and pulled the cord out of its socket."
quote: "For appearances, he stumbled slightly and made a point of not looking over his shoulder to watch the monitor go dark. It seemed important to be able to claim ignorance later, though why he felt compelled to protect Olivia's reputation was a question he refused to ponder."
quote: "Unwatched for the first time in five days, Matt walked purposely toward Olivia's room. Once through the doorway, he moved to the bed for a closer look and immediately wished he hadn't."
quote: "Olivia lay on her side, her dress rucked up around her waist. His gaze followed the tempting trail from delicate ankle, up lightly muscled calf, across sculpted thigh to the smooth white swell of a nicely rounded buttock."
quote: "One bare forearm disappeared upward beneath the pillow on which her head rested, while the other hung limp across her waist. Her breasts strained against the clingy black material of her halter top, filling it to overflowing."
quote: "Olivia moaned in her sleep and rolled onto her back, throwing both arms out wide and opening her eyes. Matt sucked in his breath and sank down on the edge of the bed."
quote: "Even heavy with sleep, Olivia's green eyes carried an awareness of him that hiked his pulse up another notch. As he settled down beside her, the confusion that had clouded them gave way to alarm."
quote: "\"Good grief, Matt . . .\" She went up on her elbows and turned her head toward the bedroom door."
quote: "\"It's okay.\" He reached out to smooth the dress back down to her knees. \"The Webcam suffered a mysterious accident. No one saw me come in here. And no one will see me leave.\""
quote: "She collapsed back down onto the bed, and he could almost hear her trying to kick her brain back into action."
quote: "His own brain and all of his senses were full of Olivia. She was the magnet that never failed to draw him, and as he stared down into the green depths of her eyes, he realized there was no way in hell he was leaving this room without making her aware of at least one elemental truth."
quote: "\"I don't know what it is, but you do something completely . . .\" He tried to find the right word and failed. \". . . visceral to me. And I know I do the same to you.\""
quote: "\"I want to make love to you. Right now. Right here.\" He reached out to caress the corner of her mouth with his thumb. \"I'm tired of being this close to you and not having you.\""
quote: "He bent down and brushed his lips over hers. \"And I think you want to make love to me for the same reason. Not because you've had too much to drink and can't help yourself, or because you're thirty. But because you want to.\""
quote: "\"It's your call, Livvy. I want you, but what happens next is completely up to you.\""
quote: "Olivia slipped off the last bonds of sleep and wine to stare up into Matt's assessing brown eyes. Her brain had cleared enough to comprehend what he was saying, and she could feel her blood beginning to boil. Not because he assumed she wanted him—he was, unfortunately, completely right about that—but because he was trying to make her admit it."
quote: "She sat up, bringing her face in line with his. \"You're going to force me to decide?\""
quote: "She put her hands on his shoulders. \"What's wrong with you? Have you forgotten how to get a woman drunk and take advantage of her? I've been responsible my entire life. I have always done the right thing, the well-considered, logical thing. And now, after thirty years of toeing the line, I'm going to be denied this one perfectly good opportunity to hide behind alcohol and be swept away by . . . by . . . blinding passion?\""
quote: "Matt laughed. \"Are you telling me you'd prefer drunken groping under a kitchen table to getting the attention you deserve?\""
quote: "Olivia jumped off the bed and turned her back on him to pace the narrow confines of the room. \"You are so dense!\""
quote: "He wasn't even allowing her time to worry about whether reality could compare with the memories she'd hoarded. Or how in the world she would find the strength to deny herself the thing she wanted most."
quote: "He stood in the middle of the room, next to the bed. \"Come here, Miss 'I Am Woman Hear Me Roar.' \""
quote: "She made a military pivot and marched back to face him."
quote: "When she just stood there glaring at him, he pulled his shirt up over his head and dropped it on the floor."
quote: "\"Oh.\" Her gaze fell to the broad shoulders, the wide expanse of chest, the arrow of dark hair beckoning downward. As she watched him unbuckle his belt, she realized that the pounding in her veins was no longer a result of anger."
quote: "\"What'll it be, Olivia?\" He smiled a lazy, sensuous smile that turned her bones to butter. \"You still want to bite my head off?\""
quote: "Boy, did she ever! And she wanted to do a whole lot of other stuff, too."
quote: "\"Well then.\" He cocked his head and moved his hands away from the waistband of his pants. \"Let's conduct a little audience research.\""
quote: "Olivia Moore did something then that she'd never done before in her life. Tired of thinking, tired of doing the right thing, tired of denying herself what she wanted most—she just reached up in her brain and like a metaphoric hand on a light switch, she flipped the damn thing off."
quote: "Matt and Olivia lay spoonlike, their naked bodies tucked into each other, their breathing and heartbeats eerily in sync. With her backside wedged against his front, and the top of her head jammed up into his chin, Matt could feel the rise and fall of her chest beneath his arm as she burrowed deeper against him."
quote: "He let his fingers skim over the warm silk of her breasts and breathed in the scent of lovemaking that still clung to her skin."
quote: "Olivia moaned and pressed her fanny tighter against him, and Matt pressed a sleepy kiss to the hollow of her shoulder."
quote: "It had taken turning thirty and an impressive amount of alcohol to unleash the passion beneath the controlled facade, but once she let go there was no one like her."
quote: "Matt swept the tips of his fingers up one bare arm and back down to rest on the curve of her hip."
quote: "She'd tried to use wine to drown the chemistry between them; then she'd tried to use the wine to allow it— and ended up under the kitchen table."
quote: "He smiled slowly over the annoyance in her eyes when he'd forced her to admit she wanted him. But once she'd given in to it, they'd made love for hours, their bodies reconnecting like parts of some not-quite-forgotten whole. Even now, they fit perfectly together, two spoons lined up snugly in the drawer. It was amazing how entirely right it felt to wake with Olivia in his arms."
quote: "Matt's eyes flew open at that alien and alarming thought. A heartbeat later a cell phone rang shrilly beside the bed."
quote: "His mind still on Olivia, he flipped open the phone. \" 'Lo.\""
quote: "\"Matt?\" Diane Lowe's shocked whisper carried the impact of a pail of cold water. \"Why are you answering Olivia's cell phone? Is she all right? What happened to the Webcam?\""
quote: "\"Whoa.\" Matt sat up in bed, trying to gather his wits. \"Hold on a minute. I'll be right with you.\""
quote: "He covered the mouthpiece of the phone with one hand and used the other for an exploratory nudge of Olivia's shoulder. She yawned and rolled over onto her back with her eyes squinched shut."
quote: "Matt uncovered the mouthpiece and brought the phone back up to his ear. \"Olivia's a little under the weather right now. I'm sure she'll be fine in a little while.\""
quote: "\"She doesn't have a little while, Matt. She goes on the air in fifteen minutes. Let me speak to her.\""
quote: "Instead, he reached a hand out and shook her a little harder. Her naked body did some really wonderful things, but her eyes remained shut. \"Too tired,\" Olivia muttered. \"Have to sleep.\""
quote: "\"She, um, can't come to the phone right now, Di.\""
quote: "\"What have you done to her, Matt? Is she all right?\""
quote: "\"Oh, no you don't,\" Diane hissed. \"You're not going to get away with this.\""
quote: "\"There's nothing to get away with. I told you she's just not feeling—\""
quote: "He could hear the panic in Diane's voice now, but really didn't think Olivia would appreciate his describing exactly what kind of condition she was in."
quote: "\"You talk to Charles, then. He's right here cackling in my ear.\""
quote: "Matt sighed. He looked down at the sleeping woman beside him, taking in the satisfied smile on her lips—the smile he'd put there and kept there throughout the wee hours of the morning."
quote: "\"Problem? No problem.\" Charles's gleeful tone brought home the possible repercussions of the situation more forcefully than Diane's panic had."
quote: "Matt almost laughed. Here he was in the exact position he'd worked toward most of the week, and all he could think of was protecting Olivia . . . and keeping that smile on her lips. He heard Crankower's weasely voice on the other end of the line and knew he couldn't throw her to the wolves."
quote: "\"Why don't you just plug that Webcam back in, Matt, and then wake the woman in bed beside you,\" the weasel chortled. \"I should have trusted you'd have some scheme up your sleeve.\""
quote: "Matt cradled the phone against his shoulder and tried to rouse Olivia, but she rolled over onto her side and drew her legs up beneath her. His gaze swept down the elegant curve of her naked back."
quote: "\"Sorry to disappoint you, Crankower. There is no scheme. Just too much to drink and maybe a touch of\"— this one was going to hurt—\"food poisoning.\""
quote: "Matt walked around the bed and crouched down to peer into Olivia's face. She wore a dreamy expression, and she looked so peaceful he couldn't bring himself to haul her out of bed."
quote: "\"So is she planning to do her show or what?\""
quote: "\"I'm not sure, Charles.\" Matt picked her dress up off the floor and tossed it on the bed. \"I'll go into her room and see what she's decided. Hold on, okay?\""
quote: "Feeling slightly foolish, he went over to her door and slammed it. With a groan, Olivia flipped over on her other side and pulled the covers up over her head. He stomped loudly across the bedroom floor for effect, then quietly tried to shake Olivia awake once more."
quote: "\"Come on, Liv,\" he whispered. \"You can do it. Just get up so you can do your show.\""
quote: "He could hear Olivia's muffled voice through the bedding."
quote: "\"Can't.\" She balled up tighter. \"I'm so tired.\""
quote: "Matt sat down on the side of the bed next to the mound of covers that was Olivia. \"Charles? She's not feeling well.\" He ran a hand through his hair. \"So, uh, we've decided to switch shows today.\""
quote: "\"Yeah. We thought it would be a good gimmick, you know, to give our listeners a dose of a different perspective.\""
quote: "\"Yep. I just over-slept, that's all. I'm not used to getting up this early.\""
quote: "\"What, you don't think I can keep a bunch of women entertained?\" Matt made a point of sounding offended."
quote: "Charles laughed aloud. Matt could almost see him rubbing his hands together in anticipation of the rating points. Of course, just whose points they'd be was an interesting question."
quote: "\"Oh, no, Matt. If anyone can keep a group of women happy, it's you. Just do me a favor, will you?\""
quote: "\"Don't forget to plug the Webcam back in. I don't want to miss a minute of this.\""
quote: "Matt punched up the theme song, left it up full as he marshaled his thoughts, and took the music back down."
quote: "\"This is all a little new to me. But I'm here and ready to, uh,\" he cleared his throat, \"discuss your problems.\""
quote: "He looked down at the computer screen to check the list of waiting callers, but there were none."
quote: "\"All right. No wimping out now.\" He drummed his fingers on the table, but nothing happened. Not a name. Not a blip on the screen. He didn't know if it was Diane's doing or if there just weren't any women out there who wanted to speak to him."
quote: "\"Right. Okay. So I don't have the doctor's credentials, but I do have something better.\" He paused while he tried to figure out what he had that Olivia didn't. All he could come up with was a penis."
quote: "\"I'm a guy. I can tell you what men really think. And what they want.\" He paused again for emphasis. \"I'm here to answer your questions. Truthfully. Completely. Anything you want to know about the man in your life and how he thinks, I can tell you. Start dialing.\""
quote: "Matt punched up the commercial break and went to put on a much-needed pot of coffee. When he got back to his seat, the monitor was full of waiting callers."
quote: "\"Okay, that's better. Let's start with caller number one. Rita M., you're on the line.\""
quote: "Rita sounded nervous and very Southern. \"I'd really feel a lot more comfortable talking to Dr. Moore about this.\""
quote: "\"Well, you can call back tonight between ten and two, or you can go ahead and give me a shot. How bad can it be?\""
quote: "\"Okay.\" There was a brief pause and then, \"I went out with someone for the first time last week. And it was great and all. He made me feel really special.\""
quote: "\"Well . . . he said he'd call, but he hasn't.\""
quote: "It didn't sound all that pressing to Matt, but it was, as they said, her dime. \"All right, let's take a look at this. How many days has it been since your date?\""
quote: "\"Five. It's been five days, but I'm thinking maybe my answering machine is on the blink.\""
quote: "\"Nope. Sorry, but if he were planning to call you, he would have done it by now.\""
quote: "\"Because I'm a guy. And because there's a sort of unwritten time limit in the guy handbook. If a male over the age of fifteen hasn't called within two or three days after a first date, he isn't going to.\""
quote: "Matt shrugged. \"I hate to be the one to break this to you, Rita, but 'I'll call you' is kind of like 'Have a nice day.' Nobody really cares whether you have a nice day or not. It's just an expression.\""
quote: "\"After five days?\" Matt shook his head. \"No way in hell.\""
quote: "Matt moved on to the next call. \"Okay, who's up next?\" He cracked his knuckles and settled back in his chair, folding his hands behind his head. \"This is Ransom. You're on the air, Marty.\""
quote: "\"Hi, Matt.\" The caller responded with the upbeat cadence of a former cheerleader. \"How are you this morning?\""
quote: "\"Yeah. They keep dragging him to bars and strip joints.\""
quote: "\"Well, not exactly.\" Some of the perkiness went out of her voice."
quote: "\"Marty, sweetheart, wake up and smell the coffee. Unless your boyfriend has been bound and gagged, chances are he's a willing participant.\""
quote: "\"Men like strip clubs. That's why they exist. You know, naked women shaking their ta-ta's in your face? Guys love that stuff.\""
quote: "\"Marty, it's relaxation, an innocent taste of the unknown, a chance to unwind. A guy always appreciates a woman who understands that.\""
quote: "\"Tonight, sweetheart. But believe me, I know what I'm talking about. Dr. O may not recognize the value of strip clubs in male bonding, but I do. Give the guy a break.\""
quote: "He couldn't detect sound or movement from Olivia's room, which meant she must still be asleep. He had no doubt she'd have been out of bed and dressed in a heartbeat if she could hear him doing her show. Truth was, he was starting to enjoy himself. Hell, you didn't even have to stop and think about this stuff, you just told everybody the way things were and moved on to the next caller. He was practically performing a public service."
quote: "Matt took his coffee back to the control panel and sat down to wait out the end of the last commercial."
quote: "As woman after woman called to complain about the behavior of husband, boyfriend, or lover, he began to wonder how men and women ever managed to connect at all. Women obviously didn't see things the way men did, and in his humble opinion, women wasted an inordinate amount of time worrying about how their relationships were going."
quote: "Other than trying to let women down easy, he'd never really stopped to think about what they might be feeling. And he'd certainly never fallen for any of their protestations of love for him. All he'd ever wanted was to have a good time."
quote: "His next caller was JoBeth, Dawg's girlfriend, and he could tell from her tight little hello that she was not a happy camper. \"I just want you to know that I don't appreciate any of the advice you've given Dawg.\""
quote: "\"You made him feel like there was no reason to make a commitment.\""
quote: "\"Hey, I just call 'em like I see 'em. It was not my intention to get in the middle of your life.\""
quote: "\"Well, you're there. Smack dab in the center of it.\""
quote: "Matt ran a hand through his hair and rubbed the back of his neck. He wouldn't have minded Olivia poking her head out about now."
quote: "\"You told him to be a man and hang tough, Matt, whatever that means. Dawg Rollins loves me and I love him. And now we don't live in the same house, and in an hour I'm going to be eating barbecue with an old boyfriend.\" JoBeth's voice broke."
quote: "\"I'm not crying. I hate crying.\" She blew her nose. \"It's just that everything's such a mess.\""
quote: "Her misery traveled through the phone line and all but smacked him in the face. Had he ever really thought about what his comments to Dawg might mean to this woman? No, of course not. He'd been flip, half-assed, and unwilling to be bothered with their personal problems. Now, dangling on the hook as he was, he forced himself to think about his response."
quote: "\"Look, you just have to make the best of this situation. Dawg doesn't want to get married and you do. It's right to go out and try to get what you want.\""
quote: "\"Well then, as strange as it feels to say so, Dr. O must be right.\""
quote: "\"Yeah.\" She gave a small sniff and an embarrassed little laugh. \"Sorry to get so heavy on you. I just . . . I guess it's time to go get ready for my date.\""
quote: "Kevin Middleton was considerably shorter than JoBeth remembered. When he rose from his side of the picnic-style table in the back room of the Smokehouse Barbecue, she couldn't help noticing that he barely topped her five foot four inches. The hand he extended in greeting was also small, and JoBeth had the disturbing thought that she could probably outwrestle him if she had a mind to. She covered the thought with a quick smile."
quote: "\"Thanks.\" JoBeth slid onto the bench across from him and opened the menu the waitress handed her. She scanned the items briefly and then looked over the top of her menu at the man her parents had chosen for a son-in-law."
quote: "\"I was sure sorry to hear about your folks. I always meant to get by and see them, but it just didn't seem . . .\" His voice trailed off and JoBeth knew then that he hadn't forgotten the awkward end of their relationship, the long, dragged-out months during which Kevin and her parents lobbied for marriage while she stalled without understanding why."
quote: "Would she sit across a table from Dawg someday while he tried to recall what he'd seen in her? She pushed the thought firmly from her mind."
quote: "\"They talked about you up until the very end,\" she said. Now there was your classic understatement. Through three years with Dawg they had never missed an opportunity to chastise her for what she'd thrown away. \"They always thought you were the best thing that ever happened to me.\""
quote: "She looked up quickly in surprise and was relieved to see a smile on his face."
quote: "\"They were fine people.\" Kevin lifted the glass of sweet tea he'd ordered and held it out toward her like a salute. \"I'm sorry for your loss.\""
quote: "They stared at each other for a long moment, taking each other's measure. JoBeth saw a medium-sized man of medium coloring with unremarkable brown eyes. There was nothing flashy about him, but she noticed he'd put himself together with care. The manicured fingernails and carefully pressed oxford shirt proclaimed him a man aware of the picture he presented, as did the freshly barbered hair, each strand perfectly in place."
quote: "Watching him converse with the waitress, JoBeth gave him points for the way he handled himself. He was friendly without passing over the line into flirtation, just as Dawg had always been. And when he placed his order, it was clear he knew his mind."
quote: "Kevin took a sip of his sweetened tea and then turned his attention back to her. He seemed less tentative than he'd been when she'd first joined him, and JoBeth reminded herself that this lunch had to be awkward for him, too."
quote: "\"I haven't been to the Smokehouse in ages. Do Hank and SandySue still own it?\" she asked."
quote: "\"They do. And I still handle all their accounting. They opened a second location in Snellville, and there's talk about franchising.\""
quote: "\"You said this business would take off, and I guess you were right.\" She was starting to remember a lot more than that. There'd been lots of Thursday night dinners at the Smokehouse as guests of Kevin's grateful client. Sunday afternoons after church had been spent at her parents'. \"I'm thinking about going back to school to finish my business degree.\""
quote: "\"Why, that's great, JoBeth. You always did have a good head on your shoulders.\" He smiled and his features sharpened. \"Except, of course, when you dumped me.\""
quote: "JoBeth could feel the blush spread across her cheeks. Both he and her parents had expected her to become Mrs. Kevin Middleton; even she had assumed it would happen one day."
quote: "\"I never dumped you. I just wasn't ready to get married back then.\" Lord, she sounded like Dawg. \"I don't think I understood how much that probably hurt you at the time, and I'm sorry for that.\""
quote: "When their combo plates arrived, they ate quietly for a while. In his own precise way, Kevin managed to put away almost as much as Dawg, though he didn't seem to expect to finish what she left on her plate, like Dawg did."
quote: "They made small talk as they ate, and while she didn't feel any major fireworks in Kevin's company, she reminded herself that she'd had plenty of that with Dawg, and it had gotten her exactly nowhere."
quote: "Studying Kevin over what remained of her chopped pork, JoBeth thought about how funny life could be. The man across from her didn't make her heart race or her palms sweat, but she could tell by the way he was checking her out when he thought she wasn't looking, that he was still interested. And not just in her mind, either."
quote: "An hour into their \"date\" they split a slice of mud pie and nursed cups of coffee. She still wasn't dazzled, but had to admit that Kevin Middleton was a nice, solid man who would make someone a nice, solid husband. As it turned out, their minds appeared to be running along similar lines."
quote: "\"You know, I wasn't sure what to think when you called me. I've been busy, I've been dating. Life's been pretty good,\" Kevin said."
quote: "JoBeth took the last bite of mud pie, chewing it carefully, taking her time with it while she tried to figure out where the conversation was headed."
quote: "She'd just put her hand over her coffee cup to discourage the last round of refills, when Kevin finally got to the point."
quote: "\"But I've never found anyone I could imagine settling down with like I could imagine it with you.\""
quote: "\"I'm thinking this whole thing could be fate's way of giving us another shot at a life together.\""
quote: "JoBeth tried to open her mouth to say something. She knew she should protest, speak up, do something. But Kevin Middleton had already taken the snap, and while she sat there openmouthed, he took the conversational ball and drop-kicked it right through her goalposts."
quote: "\"We don't need to call the caterers right now or anything, JoBeth. But I think we should spend some time getting to know each other again.\""
quote: "He beamed at her, delighted, the dapper young accountant pinning down a workable plan for the future. \"Why don't we spend tomorrow up at my lake house? I could invite a few neighbors over for supper.\""
quote: "Charles Crankower sat in the WTLK control room watching Matt Ransom construct a turkey sandwich."
quote: "On Saturdays, WTLK, like most radio stations, ran at considerably less than its usual warp speed. Sales and administrative staffs were off, and other than promotional appearances and special events, only those responsible for putting programming on the air reported to work."
quote: "Here in the main control room, a lone engineer monitored the syndicated program that currently played on the air, but Charles's attention remained riveted to the Webcam's view of Matt and Olivia's current quarters."
quote: "Idly, he zoomed the camera in to the kitchen, giving up a big chunk of the living room in order to study Matt's movements more clearly."
quote: "He watched Ransom spread designer mustard on the insides of two slices of bread, then add a dash of mayonnaise, which turned the condiment into a muted shade of gold. He piled several deli slices of turkey on one piece of bread, added two slices of what looked like Swiss cheese, and topped it all with a whopping slice of tomato and a large leaf of lettuce."
quote: "After adding chips to the plate, Matt positioned a pickle spear on the other side, then opened a beer. Without bothering to put the ingredients away, he slid the plate and bottle across the counter and walked around to sit on a barstool."
quote: "Charles studied his subject through the camera lens and grinned to himself. Matt Ransom sported a look and posture any male over the age of twelve would recognize. In stark contrast to the tension that had practically ricocheted off him before last night, his movements now were loose and comfortable, and he had a loopy smile on his face."
quote: "Matt had definitely gotten laid, and based on the way he appeared to be humming under his breath, it had probably happened more than once."
quote: "Charles thought about that one for a minute, allowing himself to imagine Matt Ransom and the straitlaced Dr. O going at it. He felt almost giddy. The promotional opportunity of a lifetime was knocking on his door, and all he had to do was invite it in."
quote: "Exposing a sexual relationship between Matt and Olivia would be bad news for the doctor's reputation and career, but the amount of attention it would generate for the station was unlimited."
quote: "At first, people would tune in for the lurid excitement of it all. Then they'd be tuning in to find out why a respected therapist with a decidedly feminist attitude would put out for Atlanta's Bachelor of the Year. The fact that they'd known each other before and kept that information secret just made the whole thing juicier."
quote: "Charles watched Matt turn his back on the camera as he took his seat at the counter. He looked like he was settling in for a while, so Charles used the remote to zoom and pan the camera, changing the angle and scope at random, curious to discover what else the camera might reveal."
quote: "Interestingly enough, it was possible to make a sideways move to the right, tilt the lens down, and pick up a new sliver of room close to the French doors. Charles had assumed that area was out of range because the lens had to point the other way to pick up the largest slice of the room. He suspected the occupants of the cage no doubt thought of this as a safe spot, but the camera had an eyeball lens and could theoretically do a 360 if necessary."
quote: "Charles filed the information away for future use and zoomed back in to see if he could get close enough to identify the magazine Matt was reading."
quote: "Ransom's producer entered the control room just as Charles gave up on the tight shot. They eyed each other with suspicion."
quote: "\"I hear you're going to be running the show for Dr. Moore tonight.\""
quote: "\"Were you surprised when Matt did Dr. O's show?\""
quote: "\"Well, sort of.\" Ben looked like he might say something else, but apparently thought better of it."
quote: "\"Any idea what she's going to do?\" Charles asked."
quote: "\"No. Matt says she's still a little under the weather. I think she's just going to field calls like he did.\""
quote: "\"Come on, Ben. You and I both know the only weather that woman's been under is Hurricane Matt.\""
quote: "He heard the producer's reluctant bark of laughter. But then the kid bit his lip and looked away."
quote: "\"The only thing I don't understand is why your boss is protecting her. He could have left that Webcam on and walked away with the whole enchilada.\""
quote: "\"Maybe he's just got a little more class than you give him credit for.\""
quote: "\"Oh, what? Matt Ransom doesn't kiss and tell? Puhlease! We're talking career here and beaucoup bucks. Matt is one of the most ambitious, competitive on-air talents I know. None of this makes any sense.\""
quote: "\"Maybe he figures he can beat her fair and square. I've got the tally here, and after Matt's show last night and his guest stint this morning, the doctor's lead is down to almost nothing. She'd have to stand on her head naked tonight to pull ahead again.\""
quote: "Charles zoomed in on the doctor's closed bedroom door, trying to picture Dr. O resorting to such a thing. \"Well, who knows. If she slept with Matt, standing on her head might not be such a stretch after all. Of course, the website votes don't mean squat compared to the consultant's report.\""
quote: "They didn't yet have the final report, but Charles knew the numbers had been phenomenal from day one of the remote. The press snapped up every morsel he fed them, and even the consultant had been walking around the station with a smile on his face."
quote: "The company was happy, T.J. was happy, and Charles knew that made him look good. But being a hero would be even better—and could keep the national office out of his hair for years to come."
quote: "It didn't matter whether Matt or Olivia won the ratings war, at least not to him. The station was a big winner no matter whom the audience preferred. But if he could engineer something totally unexpected, something bigger than the skirmishes Matt and Olivia had waged so far, his career would be made. And that, of course, was job number one."
quote: "Charles looked at the sliver of room again and tried to imagine how he could use it. He panned left to the furniture grouping and back again to the balcony, but nothing popped out at him and shouted, \"Do this!\" He stared at the screen a little longer and then moved the camera back to its wide-angle shot."
quote: "Fortunately, she appeared to be alone. Neither snores nor body warmth emanated from the other side of the bed, which meant Matt was definitely gone."
quote: "She squinted at the Roman numerals in an attempt to make some sense of them, certain there was no way they could be right. \"Shit.\" She blinked and tried again, but the little and big hands continued to point to the four and the twelve."
quote: "Olivia rolled over on her back and turned her face carefully toward the window, where bright sunlight pushed its way past the drapes. If it was four o'clock in the afternoon, \"shit\" didn't begin to cover it."
quote: "Trying not to panic, Olivia got a grip on the cell phone next to the bed and hit speed dial. Her mouth was as dry as the Sahara, and her head pounded like the concrete beneath a jackhammer, but before she went in search of aspirin and the biggest glass of water she could find, she had to know the worst."
quote: "\"Mmmph.\" There was a gulp followed by the sound of cellophane being crumpled—all the earmarks of Diane's old standby, the Oreo Diet."
quote: "\"I'm okay. But I think I need to ask the questions here.\" She grabbed her throbbing head with her free hand and braced herself. \"Why didn't you wake me this morning?\""
quote: "\"But Matt answered your phone and he wouldn't let me speak to you.\""
quote: "The surge of disappointment was immediate. Obviously, he'd seen his chance and grabbed it. When had she started expecting something more from Matt Ransom?"
quote: "\"I can't believe I let this happen. It's the end of the remote, isn't it? Oh, God. I left a great big hole in the schedule. T.J. must be totally pissed off.\""
quote: "\"I mean, how unprofessional can you get? I should have had my head examined before I agreed to be locked up in here with—\""
quote: "\"It's not nice to tease a woman teetering on the edge of a nervous breakdown, Diane. What are you saying?\""
quote: "\"Well, Matt said you were sick, maybe with food poisoning, and that you'd decided to switch shows for the day as a publicity gimmick.\""
quote: "Diane laughed. \"Don't tell him I said so, but in his own totally offensive way he was really pretty good.\""
quote: "\"Yeah. He offered the male point of view and then decimated everyone with the horrible, though probably accurate, way men actually think.\""
quote: "Olivia smiled to herself at the picture. \"You're kidding.\""
quote: "\"So I'm not totally disgraced and on my way out?\""
quote: "\"Well, everyone knows you had too much to drink. And the Webcam did get mysteriously disconnected in the middle of the night. But there's no proof of anything, and for some reason that no one can fathom, Ransom's not talking.\""
quote: "Incredible. Olivia closed her phone and propped herself up against the pillows, tucking the sheet up under her chin. The Matt Ransom she'd known in Chicago would have brought the camera right into the bedroom with them if it would bolster his career, but for some reason he'd refrained from exposing her. Literally."
quote: "The throbbing in her head dulled, probably because there wasn't enough room in there for both hangover and confusion. A memory of their lovemaking tried to elbow its way in, but she tossed it out, not willing to crowd her poor brain further."
quote: "Dressing hurriedly, Olivia considered the contradictions between the man she knew and the behavior he'd exhibited, but she couldn't come close to reconciling the two. Either Matt Ransom had turned over some wonderful new leaf, or he had something even more awful than professional embarrassment up his sleeve."
quote: "She found him in the living room lying on the couch with his eyes closed. The last inning of a baseball game played out on the TV, but Matt was in no position to notice."
quote: "Olivia went into the kitchen, found two Extra Strength Tylenol, and washed them down with an industrial-sized glass of water."
quote: "Her thirst quenched, she clicked off the television and took a seat on the second couch. For several minutes she watched him sleep and listened to him breathe while she attempted to sort through her contradictory feelings."
quote: "In sleep, Matt Ransom looked like a lot of things he wasn't—namely sweet, vulnerable, and easy to handle. In fact, if it weren't for the shadowy stubble covering his face, he might have been a little boy tuckered out after a strenuous day of play. Except for all the really incredible stuff that started just below his neck."
quote: "Olivia let her gaze travel down the length of his lightly muscled torso, hesitating for just a moment at the waistband of his jeans before traveling on to the part of him with which she had become intimately reacquainted."
quote: "This was no child. And if he was tired, it was because he'd stayed up all night making love to her. Being with Matt turned her into someone she barely recognized. She wanted to hate him for it, but just thinking about last night brought a satisfied smile to her lips."
quote: "No, anger wasn't going to cut it. There was no blame to be cast. He hadn't pressed alcohol on her, he hadn't taken anything she hadn't been embarrassingly anxious to give, and this morning, when he'd had the chance to expose her to her listeners, he hadn't. Matt Ransom just kept popping out of the box she kept trying to stuff him into."
quote: "Yanking her gaze back up to his face, she found his eyes open."
quote: "He gave her a smile that made her want to curl up next to him on the couch. She combated the weakness by reminding herself that doing one teensy-weensy honorable thing didn't make a man trustworthy."
quote: "\"Really? I don't know how you face all that angst first thing in the morning. If you ask me, those women are way too—\""
quote: "\"Matt,\" she interrupted. \"I'm trying to say thank you.\""
quote: "\"Oh, it was nothing. I enjoyed myself too, Livvy.\" He waggled his eyebrows at her."
quote: "\"We're talking about you filling in for me. Diane told me what you did.\""
quote: "\"Oh . . . your show. Well, I enjoyed that, too, in a way, but it wasn't anywhere near as great as—\""
quote: "\"Why, Liv, you're blushing.\" His eyes danced. \"You're very cute when you blush.\""
quote: "\"I'm not in the mood for jokes or compliments, Matt. I haven't figured out what you're up to yet, but I won't let my guard down like that again.\" She felt the heat climb to her cheeks again and dropped her gaze."
quote: "\"Ahhh.\" Matt stretched his arms out and then folded them to pillow the back of his head. \"Would you care to be more specific?\""
quote: "\"Last night was a one-time thing. It won't happen again.\" She watched his face carefully, looking for some sign of the regret she felt, but his smile never faltered."
quote: "\"Well, why don't you go ahead and spell that out, too. We guys can be incredibly dense sometimes.\""
quote: "She cleared her throat. \"I'm sorry I came on to you, um, under the kitchen table.\""
quote: "He nodded sagely, but the dimple in his cheek nearly split his face in two."
quote: "\"I shouldn't have done that,\" she continued. \"And we shouldn't have had sex. It was inappropriate and counterproductive, and it muddies the water between us.\""
quote: "Matt crossed one ankle over the other and settled deeper into the couch. \"Ahh, Livvy. There you go again, making this more complicated than it needs to be. The water's perfectly clear.\""
quote: "He shrugged. \"We had sex. It was great, really great. But it's no big deal.\""
quote: "\"It's just sex, Livvy. There's no reason to beat yourself up over it.\""
quote: "Olivia did more than come out swinging; she came out kicking butt. If Matt had thought Olivia would shy away from him or the audience after he'd saved her glorious rear end, he was dead wrong. And if he thought she was upset by his attitude about their night together, well, he had that wrong, too."
quote: "He'd actually been relieved when she pronounced their encounter a one-time thing. As a master of disengagement, he'd been quick to use the opportunity to piss her off and push her away. Somehow the woman had gotten too close and become much too important. Again."
quote: "He could have told her it wasn't the sex that muddied the water. It was the totally unfamiliar and completely unacceptable urge he kept feeling to protect her that was screwing everything up. And of course she wasn't behaving even remotely like he'd anticipated. He'd expected some sort of reaction—tears, recriminations, something. Instead, she'd been prancing around the living room all night, flaunting herself in front of him and the Internet audience as if she had nothing on her mind but winning rating points and votes."
quote: "She was coolly professional, not at all like the naked woman who'd come apart in his arms the night before. Focused and competent, Olivia appeared ready for four hours of live radio with potentially hostile callers, while he sat on the couch fantasizing about her like some teenage boy with a thing for the teacher."
quote: "She punched up Matt's theme song, and once it was established, she lowered the volume until only the tune remained audible. \"Okay, guys. You can put away the baseball scores and forget about your automobiles. I'm here to help, and I'm ready to talk to anyone who's prepared to share their feelings.\""
quote: "Matt held back a laugh. Like his listeners had any interest in baring their innermost thoughts to a total stranger. Sheesh. He settled in, certain they would either refuse to call in or, better yet, call and make mincemeat out of her. Each option held its own special appeal."
quote: "\"Ah, good,\" he heard Olivia say. \"I see we've got callers lined up waiting to go on the air.\""
quote: "Okay, so he'd go with the mincemeat. He bit back another grin as she took on her first caller."
quote: "\"Hi, Marvin,\" Olivia said. \"Tell me what's on your mind.\""
quote: "\"She wants me to give up golf and I can't do that, not even for her. I won't.\""
quote: "Matt thought Marvin sounded a bit hysterical, and no wonder, the poor slob had married a woman intent on sucking the last kernel of enjoyment out of him."
quote: "\"Well, not yet, but I know it's coming. She says it takes up too much of my time.\""
quote: "\"Well, let's see. I have a regular foursome on Saturdays. I usually play another nine Sunday. On Tuesdays, I may go out and hit on the driving range after work. And, well, of course on Wednesdays I take off from work to play, but everybody does that.\""
quote: "\"Okay. Let's look at this in another way. Do you ever ask your wife to join you on any of these occasions?\""
quote: "\"Well, she used to play on Sundays with me, and sometimes we'd go to the driving range together on Tuesdays, but she's kind of lost interest.\""
quote: "Matt saw Olivia's eyes narrow and began to suspect it wasn't Dr. O who was going to get minced."
quote: "\"You have three one-year-old babies in your home?\""
quote: "\"Yeah. Two boys and a girl. Very cute. My wife's doing a wonderful job with them.\""
quote: "\"And you're wondering why your wife resents all the time you spend playing golf?\""
quote: "Matt could almost see the guy squirming in his chair."
quote: "\"Marvin. Grow up. Get with the program. You're lucky you haven't been murdered in your sleep or had your golf balls cut off.\""
quote: "Matt grinned. Olivia looked like an avenging angel ready to swoop down and give old Marvin a head butt with her halo."
quote: "\"Marvin. Your wife and children deserve more of you than what you're squeezing in between golf games.\""
quote: "\"I've already traded the Porsche for a Suburban, and I've cut my golf trips down to two a year. A guy's gotta have some fun.\""
quote: "\"Marvin. Do you hear what I'm saying to you?\""
quote: "And then she dumped the call. Impressed despite himself, Matt nonetheless wanted to rub his hands together in glee. After hearing Olivia maul Marvin that way, 90 percent of the waiting calls had probably hung up. He'd just sit here and watch her shoot off her own foot with all that feminist business. Guys didn't want to hear that kind of stuff."
quote: "\"Well, look at those phone lines light up,\" Olivia crowed. \"Hang on, fellas,\" she said as she prepared to punch up a commercial. \"I want to talk to each and every one of you.\""
quote: "The next caller was young Jason of Fantasy Island fame. Matt perked up."
quote: "\"Hi, Dr. O.\" Jason's voice broke on the \"O,\" turning it into a painful symphony of sounds."
quote: "\"Hi, Jason. Are you sure you're allowed to be up this late?\""
quote: "\"Sure.\" His voice broke in the middle of the word, and Matt bit back a laugh. Olivia hastily disguised hers behind a cough."
quote: "\"So, what are you calling about, Jason? No more raft fantasies, I hope.\""
quote: "\"No'm.\" Jason evidently had a parent somewhere who believed in manners. \"I'm real sorry about that. My mom says it's this puberty thing. I . . . well, I'm always imagining everyone naked.\""
quote: "\"Gee.\" Olivia's tone was dry. \"That is rough. Now, what can I do for you?\""
quote: "\"Every time I see a good-looking woman—even older ones like you—I...\""
quote: "Olivia blinked, and once again Matt managed not to laugh."
quote: "\"I get, um, well, you know. Sometimes I can barely walk. And I spend a lot of time hiding behind things until I can get the picture out of my mind, you know?\""
quote: "\"I mean, I even imagine my Sunday school teacher without her clothes on. Religion class is getting really rough.\""
quote: "Unable to stop himself, Matt laughed out loud as memories of his own adolescent fantasies came rushing back to him. One of the steamiest had starred Victoria Ramsfeld, the local librarian."
quote: "Olivia shot him a murderous look but kept her tone calm as she addressed her caller. \"Jason, I think that—\""
quote: "\"And I was wondering, too.\" The boy's voice dropped to a whisper. \"Is it true that you can go blind from too much . . .\""
quote: "There was a telling pause while Jason evidently tried to figure out how many years to pad."
quote: "\"Right,\" she said. \"Well then . . .\" Olivia tried once again to reassure her caller that his vision was safe, but suddenly Jason's already urgent tone turned frantic."
quote: "\"Sorry, I have to go.\" And then, with all the anguish of adolescence, he wailed, \"I think my mother's coming.\""
quote: "Olivia laughed. \"Hang in there, Jason. I promise you what you're experiencing is extremely normal. Everything will, uh, ultimately calm down.\""
quote: "Still smiling, Olivia took the next call. And the next. And the one after that."
quote: "Matt's own smile over her deft handling of the boy began to fade as he listened to his callers lap Olivia up like cream. They called in unprecedented numbers, pledged huge quantities of food, and then waited their turn to spill their guts, thanking her for her sage advice when she was done."
quote: "The very same men who had screamed for her blood when her advice interfered with their love lives now couldn't wait to beg her advice. They were Benedict Arnolds the whole bunch of them, thought Matt. Put a pretty woman with a Ph.D. in front of them, and they fell all over themselves to share their most intimate secrets."
quote: "Or else they called to hit on her. Like Beau from Beaufort, South Carolina, who spent a nauseating amount of time explaining just how easy it would be to pop into the Mercedes and head on down to Atlanta. And who apparently had nothing more pressing to share than his lust for Olivia Moore."
quote: "\"So, Dr. O.\" Beau's voice was Southern and smooth. \"From what I can see on my monitor, you are looking lovely tonight. Are you feeling better?\""
quote: "\"Why, I'm just fine,\" Olivia drawled back, her voice like honey. \"I think you could say I've recovered fully from what ailed me.\" She shot Matt a \"take that\" kind of look. \"Is there something you want to discuss with me?\""
quote: "Olivia ignored him. \"Did you have a question, Beau? Or are you just trying to make my heart go pitter-pat?\""
quote: "\"I'd like to know if there's something going on between you and Ransom. Because if there isn't, I'd like to ask you out.\""
quote: "\"Olivia?\" Matt strode over toward the control board, covering the floor in two angry strides. \"Do you really think this is appropriate on-air behavior?\""
quote: "\"Well, damn,\" said Beau as Olivia dumped his call. Her obvious lack of interest in the man cheered Matt considerably."
quote: "And so it went until well after midnight, Matt's irritation growing with each fawning caller, his hackles rising with every flirtation and sexual innuendo. For a man who believed he didn't have a jealous bone in his body, it was downright disconcerting."
quote: "\"Okay, Dawg. You're on the air. I've been waiting to hear what's happening with you and JoBeth.\""
quote: "\"Oh, lots of things are happening, and none of them are good.\""
quote: "\"JoBeth went out with her old boyfriend today—the one her parents thought walked on water.\""
quote: "\"And why does that bother you? When she told you she needed a commitment, you told her no. What's the problem?\""
quote: "\"I love her, Dr. O. I told her that. I was very clear.\""
quote: "\"And I even told her why I don't want to get married. I mean, after my wife walked out on me when my life and my career were in the toilet, I said never again.\""
quote: "\"Can you see her treating you that way? Walking out, leaving you to fend for yourself?\""
quote: "\"Hell, no. She nursed her parents, both of them, for almost two years, and I've never met a meaner, less appreciative couple.\""
quote: "\"Dawg, don't you see? You've tarred JoBeth with your ex-wife's brush. Your fear of being hurt again is causing you to lose the woman you love. Are you going to let that happen?\""
quote: "Matt listened to the urgency in Olivia's voice as she tried to make Dawg grasp her point. For the first time, Matt realized her words could apply just as easily to him. Dawg had at least had a wife. He'd never let anyone in after Adam died. Not even Olivia had been allowed, though she'd made the biggest dent in his heart."
quote: "Olivia hadn't seen the vote tally yet, but she'd been in the business long enough to know her Saturday night stint as the host of Guy Talk had been a resounding success. Matt's listeners had been incredibly responsive, and there'd been a ton of them. She only hoped her own audience hadn't deserted her after her birthday slide under the table and the alleged bout of food poisoning that followed."
quote: "Her stomach growled. She'd forfeited breakfast in favor of sleep, and she definitely needed some fuel. This morning's show had been her last of the survivor series— thank you, God—and it had gone well enough. The topic, temptation and how and when to avoid it, had seemed particularly appropriate to a Sunday morning crowd. And she'd needed to hear the message herself."
quote: "She was sitting at the counter waiting for a fresh pot of coffee when Matt appeared. Once again he had on considerably fewer clothes than she deemed acceptable or wise, and she bristled at his total disregard for her wishes. With effort, she kept her gaze averted from his bare chest and somehow managed not to swivel on her barstool to catch the back view as he passed her on his way to the refrigerator."
quote: "\"Morning.\" He sounded surprisingly cheerful for someone who had to be trailing badly in both votes and donations."
quote: "With only twenty-four hours left in captivity, Olivia decided she could afford to be magnanimous. \"Good morning. Sleep well?\""
quote: "Her gaze dipped down below his neck and got stuck in his chest hairs. Gravity being what it was, it took a massive act of will to keep her gaze from straying to the waistband of those dratted gym shorts. Or past what lay under them to the muscled thighs below."
quote: "Better to focus on Matt's annoying habits rather than his physical attributes. Luckily there were plenty to choose from. Like the way he was leaning against the open refrigerator door with the carton of orange juice raised to his lips."
quote: "He lowered the carton, shook it to see if there was anything left, and took one final swallow before putting the empty carton back in the fridge. \"Nope. I've been up since nine. Didn't want to miss your show.\" He smiled. \"I didn't realize you were planning to give a sermon.\""
quote: "\"Well, you did cover quite a lot of biblical ground— temptation, the wages of sin. I just kept waiting for the prerecorded amen's. Who was the sermon for, sweetheart—your poor listeners or yourself?\""
quote: "\"Hey. I'm not the one who spent three hours harping on the pitfalls of purely physical relationships. But I am probably the only listener who had any idea what you were ranting about.\""
quote: "On the bright side, she no longer felt even remotely tempted to look at Matt Ransom's chest."
quote: "\"I think you can't stand being out of control for a second, Olivia. You are horrified that you can't control how your body reacts to mine. And it galls you that you want more of what we had the other night.\""
quote: "\"That's right. I don't need a Ph.D. to recognize lust when I see it. You're just upset that it's me you want. I'm not exactly thrilled about the fact that my body seems so intent on yours either, but you don't see me wasting a show beating myself up about it.\""
quote: "\"No, you're not wasting shows, never that. But you sure are wasting your life.\""
quote: "One of Matt's eyebrows shot up, but Olivia ignored the warning. Something perverse in her wanted him just as angry as she was. Getting up off her stool, she marched around the counter so she could confront him without anything blunting her anger. She could feel it bubbling up through her bloodstream, and for once she didn't smash it back down. If he felt free to bash her over the head with his version of the truth, then she would do the same."
quote: "\"Maybe if you stopped swaggering around sleeping with every woman you meet, you could actually explore what it is that keeps you from sharing yourself with anyone. For an allegedly outgoing guy, you are one of the most secretive people I've ever met.\""
quote: "She pointed a finger at his chest, and in her anger practically drilled a hole with it. \"Getting to know you feels a lot like extracting teeth. Without Novocain. You call me buttoned down, but you are completely zipped up, and you aren't even trying to let anyone in. Pretty soon people will just stop bothering. And then you can have what you want—lots of unimportant sex with women who don't really care about you.\""
quote: "They stood there toe to toe, neither moving. Olivia's finger felt welded to Matt's chest, and both of them were breathing heavily. In a romance novel, the sexual energy surging between them would have forced them into each other's arms and ultimately led to declarations of undying love. But romance novels weren't set in front of Webcams and didn't feature diehard fans eagerly waiting for the hero and heroine to tear each other apart."
quote: "Matt found his voice first. \"Well done, Olivia. Wouldn't want our last afternoon in captivity to be as ho-hum as your last show. I'll write you a check for your on-the-spot analysis.\""
quote: "Olivia took a step back. \"Don't bother.\" She looked up into the brown eyes that moments before had sizzled with heat and now revealed absolutely nothing. \"Let's just consider it a parting gift. Someday you might actually use it.\""
quote: "JoBeth sipped her wine and looked longingly around her. Kevin's vacation place, a two-bedroom stilt house on a mountain overlooking North Georgia's Lake Burton, nearly took her breath away. Both bedrooms were masters, separated by a central great room with floor-to-ceiling windows overlooking the view. The house, which Kevin walked her through with obvious pride, had two fireplaces, a wraparound deck, and a screened dining porch off the fully equipped kitchen."
quote: "JoBeth loved the house, its location, and its incredible view. She especially liked rocking on the deck and looking down the mountainside at the now placid lake below. It was only Kevin she wasn't so sure about."
quote: "He'd already started calling her by the nickname she'd once found appealing. And she had the traitorous thought that if he'd just stop talking, everything would be fine."
quote: "\"Oh, I'm just swept up by the view, Kevin. It's incredible out here. So still and beautiful.\""
quote: "\"It is, isn't it?\" He rocked in silence for a moment and then said, \"I bought this property while we were still together.\""
quote: "\"I know. I meant it to be a wedding present.\" His tone grew wistful. \"I had this crazy idea of us camping out up here for our honeymoon.\" He gave an embarrassed laugh and looked away."
quote: "\"Well, it all worked out okay. I've enjoyed the house. But I always wondered what you'd think of it.\" He turned back to her, waiting for her response."
quote: "\"Why, it's fabulous. I can't think of a thing I'd change.\" She only wished she could get as excited about him as she was about the stacked-stone fireplaces and the two-person Jacuzzi. She rocked a little harder as she puzzled it out."
quote: "Kevin smiled, and JoBeth reminded herself what a good catch he was. Kevin Middleton was attractive and nice, and he'd certainly done very well for himself. Apparently \"catching\" him would not be a difficult task, since he didn't appear to be running at all."
quote: "She could tell from the way his doelike brown eyes regarded her when he thought she wasn't looking that he still cared about her, and she tried to dredge up some answering feeling of her own. But all she could think was how much Dawg would enjoy fishing on the lake. And how fine it would be to sit and rock with him on a summer evening while the fireflies sparked around them."
quote: "She stood and walked to the railing for a last look at the view. Kevin joined her and she fell back a step, realizing that the last thing she wanted to do right now was kiss this man, when Dawg was so much on her mind."
quote: "Ignoring her body language, Kevin stepped closer and put a hand out to caress her cheek. \"You never stopped being important to me, JoBug, and I plan to be important to you again. In fact, I'm going to make sure of it.\""
quote: "Charles Crankower sat in the control room while Matt and Ben talked on headphone. Within twenty-four hours they'd have the consultant's report, and in another few weeks the book would be out with the final ratings breakdown. Right now, the only existing measurement of talent popularity was the weeklong printout of votes and food donations Charles held in his hand. There'd been the expected upward swings after noticeably strong shows, but in the end the statistical difference between the two hosts didn't amount to much."
quote: "In Charles's experience \"too close to call\" wasn't anywhere near as promotable as a landslide victory and somebody eating crow. Matt Ransom knew these facts as well as he did. He had one more show and almost twelve hours left to put Olivia out of the running, but for some reason the man seemed to have lost his edge."
quote: "Charles reached a hand out to tap Ben on the shoulder. \"Let me borrow your headphones, will you?\""
quote: "Matt's producer eyed him as suspiciously as ever, but passed them over without protest."
quote: "Charles fit the headphones onto his head and spoke into the tiny microphone. \"Hey, Matt. Hope you're getting ready to pull out all the stops. I know you don't want to lose out to the doctor at this stage.\""
quote: "\"What do you want me to do, Crankower, set myself on fire? I don't have to see the numbers to know the station has no room for complaints.\""
quote: "\"Well, I just don't want to see you blow this opportunity for a decisive victory. If Olivia were compromised in some way . . .\""
quote: "Charles saw Ben's head whip around. Turning away from the producer, he lowered his voice. \"The sexual thing between you is already obvious to anyone who's paying attention. Maybe it's time to let our listeners know what happened between you two in Chicago.\""
quote: "There was a long silence and then, \"Forget it, Charles. I'm not interested in your bag of dirty tricks. The show I've got planned will be more than enough to keep me on the air.\""
quote: "Ransom actually growled at him, which Charles found very interesting. \"Give me Ben, Crankower. And keep your sticky fingers out of my pie.\""
quote: "At 10 P.M. Olivia put on her sheep pajamas and crawled into bed. She felt a bone-deep weariness that had little to do with lack of sleep and too much to do with the words she and Matt had hurled at each other earlier."
quote: "They'd spent the afternoon in full-combat readiness, both ready to strike if another offensive was launched. Dinner had been a painful affair with none of the easy camaraderie she'd come to look forward to. It was hard to believe the Matt Ransom she faced today was the same one who had taken her to the moon and back just a day ago."
quote: "Turning on the radio, she wondered what topic he'd pull out of his hat for his last show. She knew he'd never go out without attempting to eradicate her lead, but she wasn't seriously worried. After the votes she'd pulled in Saturday night, it would take a real doozy to do any more than just even the score. She'd worry about the consultant and the upcoming ratings book when she had to. Right now, all she wanted was out of this remote and this place. And out of Matt's way."
quote: "Matt's theme music came up full, and Olivia turned off the bedside light and settled in to listen. It didn't take long for her weariness to be replaced, once again, by a white-hot anger."
quote: "\"Okay, guys,\" Matt said. \"This is it, the last show of the last day of captivity, which means the last chance to vote for Yours Truly. We've taken in a ton of money and food, thanks to you. We'll have the totals to announce tomorrow morning during our release. Ahh, what a glorious word. Release.\""
quote: "She heard another tune sneak in under his voice, but she couldn't quite recognize the music."
quote: "\"In fact, release is an important aspect of our topic tonight. So is freedom.\""
quote: "Now she could make out the song. It was \"The Wedding March,\" cranked up full in all its simple glory. It took no imagination at all to picture women in white dresses floating down church aisles toward their adoring grooms."
quote: "\"Tonight we're going to hear about some great escapes.\" The music didn't just stop then, it screeched to a halt as if someone had dragged the needle of a record player across it."
quote: "\"That's right, gentlemen. Tonight we're going to hear first-person testimonials from men who almost succumbed but\"—another dramatic pause and a drum roll—\"managed to extricate themselves at the last possible moment and at great personal peril.\""
quote: "Male applause and cheers came up full. Olivia sat up in bed and crossed her arms over her chest. She could feel her teeth clench."
quote: "Matt came on as glib as ever. Olivia could practically hear him chortling, and she felt an overwhelming urge to go out there and drag him away from the microphone, stuff him in a footlocker, and drop him off a very tall bridge."
quote: "\"All right, gentlemen. Say hello to Barry, who found a unique way out of the ties that bind. Barry, tell us your story.\""
quote: "\"Well, I was sitting at the rehearsal dinner the night before the wedding.\""
quote: "\"And I'm eating the shrimp cocktail, and I look up and notice that not a single one of the men at the tables around us is talking. These are all the guys who've married into my fiancée's family, and they're just nodding their heads and saying, 'Yes, dear, No, dear.' \""
quote: "\"Scary? I tell you, all of a sudden I couldn't breathe.\""
quote: "\"Well, I had to think fast, you know. I mean, you can't just pull the woman aside and say, 'I'm sorry but I don't want to turn out like all the other poor stiffs who married into your family.' \""
quote: "Olivia could tell Matt was eating up every horrible word. All she could think of was the poor woman who was about to see her dreams blow up in her face."
quote: "\"Not at first. But pretty soon I dance her onto the edge of the dance floor, right between our table and my future in-laws.\""
quote: "\"And I start kissing her, really kissing her, you know?\""
quote: "Matt laughed, and Olivia heard gasps of horror play up full."
quote: "Encouraged, Barry continued. \"And then, just to be sure there's no mistake what's going on, I grind my pelvis against her—a real Elvis number.\""
quote: "\"Well, I can tell she's getting ready to huff off the floor, and I'm afraid no one sees what's happening, so I put my hand down the front of her dress.\""
quote: "\"Then the sister screams, the place gets real quiet, and my fiancée storms over and throws the ring in my face.\" Barry sounded genuinely happy."
quote: "\"Well, I heard it turned into a real slugfest, but I wasn't there for that part of it.\""
quote: "\"Gee, Barry,\" said Matt. \"This isn't sounding like the cleanest escape I ever heard of.\""
quote: "\"Well, her father did beat me to a bloody pulp.\""
quote: "\"But you know, even now after the plastic surgery and the physical therapy, I remember all those silent men yearning to be free, and I count myself a lucky man.\""
quote: "Olivia spent the commercial break pacing. Matt had chosen a surefire winner for his final show. His audience was no doubt falling over itself laughing, just as Matt intended. But Olivia couldn't stop thinking about Barry's fiancée's public humiliation, her rehearsal dinner a shambles, her family's money sunk in a wedding day that would never be. Who knew what horrible tale groom number two would have to tell."
quote: "If she needed more proof of Matt's feelings about commitment and the likelihood of his ever sharing a life with someone, she had it. He had no respect for women in general or for her in particular. To him, everything was one big joke. What she wouldn't give to shake some sense into him."
quote: "\"Okay, everybody, our next caller is Michael. And his story is a little different than the last one we heard, though the end result is the same. Michael, you're on the air.\""
quote: "There was a pause, and Matt laughed. \"We're all ears.\""
quote: "\"Well, Meredith and I took skydiving lessons together. We'd been talking about maybe getting married one day, and the next thing I know, we're planning to get married during a jump.\""
quote: "\"That's one way to keep the guest list small.\""
quote: "\"Yeah, it was going to be just the two of us. A friend who's a notary was going to marry us on the way down.\""
quote: "\"You're not going to tell me someone's chute didn't open?\""
quote: "\"No, everyone walked away from that jump. Well, actually, I flew away.\""
quote: "\"Well, as soon as the plane started climbing, I started having doubts, you know?\""
quote: "\"Yeah, that's what I thought. So I'm starting to panic a little, you know. We're approaching jumping altitude, and the plane's starting to level off, and I don't think I can go through with it. Only there's no time to discuss it. We're really close to our jump site, and Meredith and the notary are already moving over to the open doorway.\""
quote: "\"Well, it was too loud in the plane to talk, and shouting that I don't want to get married seemed, I don't know, it's just not something you yell at somebody, you know?"
quote: "\"So we leveled off at twelve thousand feet, and Meredith unhooked her lead line, flashed me this big smile, and jumped. Our friend, the notary, went right after her. And I'm standing there, you know, like my feet are nailed to the floor of the plane or something.\""
quote: "\"It was kind of surreal. I saw their chutes open—hers had a red heart painted on it for the wedding—and I saw them both look up, but it was too late. I paid the pilot to drop me at a small rural airport in the next state, and I just laid low for a while.\""
quote: "\"Not really. She wouldn't talk to me after that. I heard a while later that she married our diving instructor. He evidently made it out of the plane with no problem.\""
quote: "And so it went, each story worse than the last. One caller had jumped ship, literally, diving headfirst off the cruise ship booked for his wedding. Another fled back down the aisle of the church with his fiancée and the flower girl clinging to the tails of his morning coat."
quote: "Olivia's slow burn began to build. She forced herself to listen to every word, took in every annoying barb and chuckle, all of it a slap in the face to every woman who had ever expected anything from the man she loved."
quote: "She wondered if he really thought all women were just grasping, needy beings trying to trap a man into taking that walk to the altar. She wanted to go out there and yank him out of his chair and show him just how full of shit he was."
quote: "When he finally signed off, still chortling over his callers' great escapes, she sprang out of bed and began to pace. She paced for a good twenty minutes, trying to blow off enough steam to ignore the affront to herself and womankind. She knew she should just go back to bed, but the more she replayed the show in her mind, the angrier she became."
quote: "When her need to tell him off became too much for her, she threw open her door and stormed into the living room."
quote: "Olivia marched up to where he stood in the center of the living room. \"What is wrong with you? Have you no concern for anyone else? No sensitivity for other people's feelings?\""
quote: "\"Olivia, you're wearing sheep pajamas, and you're shouting like a fishwife. How do you think that's going to look to our audience?\""
quote: "Beside herself with fury, she could hardly acknowledge the merit of his warning. With a hand to his chest she pushed him backward across the room and out of camera range until his back was flush up against the French doors that led to the balcony."
quote: "In the station control room, Charles Crankower, super spider, unfurled his long body from the chair it had been folded into for the last six and a half hours. Quietly, so as not to alert Matt's producer, who was still clearing up after the show, he panned the camera to frame up the shot he'd discovered earlier. His heart leapt for joy at what came into view."
quote: "Matt stood with his back to the balcony doors. Olivia stood facing him with her back to the camera. He could see Matt's face and its look of surprise. At first their body language was completely adversarial, all rigid angles and barely leashed tension. But as he watched, Olivia moved closer, and the next thing he knew, she was kissing the hell out of Matt Ransom."
quote: "With a big thank-you to the PR gods he'd almost given up on, Charles checked to make sure the camera was recording."
quote: "Olivia pressed herself against Matt. His physical response was swift and immediate, and for some reason this made her even angrier."
quote: "Surprising them both, she kissed him. Hard. \"We're all the same to you, aren't we, Matt? Push the right button, kiss the right spot, and voilà! Matt Ransom's ready for action.\""
quote: "Totally on the offensive and anxious to prove her point, she rubbed her body against his. Once again, his response was immediate and unmistakable."
quote: "\"So, I guess that happens for everyone, huh? Doesn't matter who it is, or what's going on. Is that right, Matt?\""
quote: "Without giving him time to respond, she bracketed his face in her hands and kissed him again, using her tongue and her teeth and all of her fury."
quote: "She suckled his earlobe, ran her tongue down the side of his face, and came back to his lips. \"And when I do this, it doesn't matter that it's me, Olivia? Will any pair of hands, any lips really do?\""
quote: "Matt didn't answer. His erection felt like a slab of marble between them, and as she kissed him, she felt his heat rise until his skin actually became hot to the touch. His look of surprise had been replaced by sharp-featured desire that she wanted to know was only for her. \"A woman is a woman is a woman, right?\" she taunted. \"Can you tell us apart in the dark, Matt? Do you care?\""
quote: "\"Jesus, Livvy.\" His arms snaked around her, and his hands cupped her buttocks as he pulled her closer."
quote: "Olivia was beyond reason. Somehow she would devour him as he had devoured her and use his own lust to make him admit that what was between them was more than physical. She wasn't buying his \"love the one you're with\" crap a moment longer."
quote: "\"Do you recognize my touch, Matt? My scent, my voice?\""
quote: "Focused completely on the man in front of her, Olivia brought her mouth back to his. Her fingers moved to the top button of his shirt, and when they fumbled, she gave in to her impatience and ripped the shirt open, sending buttons flying across the room."
quote: "She ran her hands over the smorgasbord of skin. They traveled up his chest to tangle in the mat of dark hair, then followed the dark arrow back toward the waistband of his jeans."
quote: "\"How about my mouth, Matt? Do you think you'd recognize that?\""
quote: "She bent her head to circle a nipple with her tongue, and drew the hardening bud between her teeth."
quote: "Matt's hands slipped up under her pajama top and over her bare back, skimming, exploring, heating her skin to the same temperature as his. Olivia straightened and twined her arms around his neck. Going up on tiptoe, she pressed against him, fitting herself over the hard swell of his erection."
quote: "Desire, hot and insistent, coursed through her bloodstream, in spite of her anger."
quote: "She'd just dropped her arms and lifted her fingers to the snap of Matt's jeans when his hands clamped down on her shoulders, halting all movement. Olivia's gaze flew to Matt's face. The look there told her something was horribly wrong. She tried to turn around, but his hands on her shoulders held her in place."
quote: "\"Don't move,\" he ordered. \"I have to figure out what to do.\""
quote: "Matt let go of her shoulders. \"Don't move,\" he instructed again. \"And don't turn around. We seem to be on camera.\""
quote: "Her heart seeming to plunge into the pit of her stomach, Olivia disobeyed. Turning, she looked up and encountered the unblinking lens of the Webcam. Her gaze flew to the TV monitor beneath it, where she could see Matt still framed from head to just below his waist, with her frozen in front of him."
quote: "She felt the heat flare up to scorch her cheeks. Good God, she had just attacked Matt Ransom in front of an Internet audience. She was beyond humiliation. She was finished."
quote: "Numb, she watched Matt stride over to the entertainment center and rip the Webcam's power plug out of the wall."
quote: "\"How did the camera get pointed this way?\" she asked."
quote: "\"I just don't. During my show it was in its usual position. I never looked again after that.\" He smiled tentatively. \"I was preoccupied.\""
quote: "\"Don't you dare make jokes. My whole reputation's shot to hell in some futile attempt to force you to admit all women aren't the same.\""
quote: "\"You think this is funny! I have lost all credibility. Who will ever be able to listen to my advice without picturing me throwing myself at you?\""
quote: "\"It's not quite that bad, Olivia. Until you turned around, all they could see was the back of a blonde head.\""
quote: "\"Oh, right, like there's been more than one blonde in this apartment this week.\""
quote: "\"Well, you seemed pretty concerned that I might have you confused with someone else.\""
quote: "She shot him a withering glance and started to pace. \"I don't believe this!\" She stopped pacing to turn on him as the pieces started to fall into place. \"You. You set me up.\""
quote: "\"Olivia, be reasonable. There was no way I could know you were planning to corner me and, er, have your way with me.\" He didn't seem particularly concerned that he'd been caught engaging in serious foreplay on camera. But this just made him all the more macho, didn't it? And what did it make her?"
quote: "\"All week I've been trying to figure out what you were up to. 'Relax, Olivia.' 'Don't be so uptight, Livvy.' 'What good is success if you can't enjoy it, Liv?' As if you cared one bit how I actually felt.\""
quote: "She did an about-face and paced in the other direction, unable to look him in the eye. What in the world had she been thinking? How had she allowed her anger and frustration to get the best of her? She was totally out of control, and it was all Matt Ransom's fault."
quote: "\"You feed me a tiny bit of your real self, little dribs and drabs that make me believe you're actually reachable and capable of feeling, and what do I do? Turn myself upside down trying to find the rest. I'm the one who should have my head examined.\""
quote: "Matt plopped down on the sofa and put his feet up on the coffee table. \"Olivia, just calm down. There's got to be a way out of this.\""
quote: "But she was beyond thought, beyond giving him the remotest benefit of any doubt. Another thirty seconds and a national audience could have watched her bury her face in Matt Ransom's crotch without any understanding of the reasons why. Hell, she no longer understood the reasons why. She only knew that she had come to trust him in some subliminal way and he had betrayed that trust."
quote: "Olivia whirled around to face him. \"What did you do, pay someone at the station to reposition the Webcam so you could lure me into a compromising position?\""
quote: "Then she tuned him out, completely. Like she should have done the day the door clicked shut behind them."
quote: "Charles Crankower danced a little jig in the empty WTLK control room. The Webcam had been disconnected, but it couldn't have mattered less. He had exactly what he needed, exactly what he'd wanted but hadn't dared hope for."
quote: "Jubilant, he picked up his cell phone and started placing calls. The last number he dialed was the Operation Manager's home number. T.J. Lawrence picked up on the second ring."
quote: "\"Crankower, do you have any idea what time it is?\""
quote: "\"No, T.J., it's nothing like that. It's the remote. There's been an unexpected development.\""
quote: "He heard T.J.'s tone turn serious. \"Are Matt and Olivia okay?\""
quote: "\"Oh, they're fine, though I suspect they may be duking it out in earnest right now.\""
quote: "In a rush he told the OM exactly what had happened, careful to make it sound like the camera movement had been unintentional, just a changing of the audience view to keep things visually interesting. T.J. had always had a soft spot for Olivia, and Charles doubted T.J. would want to know to what lengths he'd gone to set her up."
quote: "\"Yeah, somebody must have been monitoring the website,\" Charles lied, glad he'd had the foresight to call his contacts from his cell phone before T.J. could forbid it."
quote: "\"All right, but just how explicit is this video, Crankower? Are we going to be running into trouble over that?\""
quote: "\"No. I'll call Legal if you want me to, but I don't think it's going to be an issue. There's no actual exposure even though it's pretty clear what's happening.\""
quote: "Charles heard the rustling of sheets and pictured T.J. trying to slip out of bed without disturbing his wife. \"Olivia must be totally freaked out,\" said T.J. \"Call Diane and Ben in to the station, will you? I'll call the apartment from my car.\""
quote: "In contrast, Charles practically floated above the floor in what looked like ecstatic anticipation, while one of the guards gave Olivia an obvious once-over and the other sent Matt a man-to-man wink that made Matt want to deck them both."
quote: "Walking out the front door of the apartment held none of the satisfaction he'd anticipated, and a glance at Olivia's face as they walked down the long carpeted hallway to the elevator told him she was too caught up in her own misery to appreciate their newfound freedom."
quote: "They stopped in the lobby for a last pep talk from T.J., which amounted to encouraging Olivia to ignore the seamier questions and begging Matt not to hurt anyone. \"Let's just focus on our listeners' contributions to the food bank and try to steer clear of the rest, shall we?\""
quote: "They all nodded as though this might be possible, then T.J., Charles, and the security duo pushed through the doors and were swallowed by the clamoring crowd."
quote: "Now they stood side by side waiting to go out and face the media, and the expression on her face made him want to offer her . . . what?"
quote: "\"You know, no one actually saw anything, Olivia. For all they know I was feeling faint and you were giving me mouth-to-mouth.\""
quote: "\"Right.\" Her voice was bitter. \"And I ripped your shirt open so you could breathe better.\""
quote: "\"Look, Olivia, we're both single, consenting adults. What happened is a little embarrassing, but the Clinton presidency survived worse.\""
quote: "\"I've got a news flash for you, Matt. This may be just one more amusing peccadillo to your listeners—they expect this sort of behavior from you. But I'm a therapist. My listeners need to be able to respect and trust me. This is not okay.\""
quote: "\"I'm sorry, Liv. If you want to deny everything, I'll back you up.\""
quote: "\"I don't need you to back me up. And I don't need you to lie for me. In fact, I don't want anything from you.\""
quote: "Olivia turned away from him and pushed through the front door. Matt followed closely behind."
quote: "He had less than a second to register the beauty of the day before the shouting started."
quote: "\"Which one of you pulled the plug on the Webcam?\""
quote: "Matt felt Olivia tense beside him, and he couldn't blame her; the crush of reporters resembled nothing so much as a pack of baying dogs. They kept barking their questions, even though they remained unanswered, and all of their questions centered on identifying what they'd caught a glimpse of before the cord was pulled."
quote: "Charles stepped forward and raised a hand for silence. A sea of video cameras pointed his way, and microphones were thrust up in the air. Back behind the crowd, two reporters did their stand-ups for a live report."
quote: "Matt was surprised by the presence of the wire services and cable news networks. It must have been a slow news day, or perhaps the story of a therapist giving in to her baser instincts was an even bigger story than he'd imagined. Or maybe someone had tipped them off."
quote: "When the crowd fell silent, Charles dispensed the good news—an unprecedented amount raised for the Third Harvest Food Bank, audience participation at an all-time high. But as he spoke, all eyes stayed on Matt and Olivia, and those eyes were full of speculation as each reporter tried to imagine what had taken place in the locked apartment."
quote: "Beside him, Olivia began to tremble. Instinctively, he stepped closer to lend his body as support. He wanted to put an arm around her shoulder and drag her away from the mob, or at least speak up in their defense, but every glib response that sprang to his mind died on his lips because he couldn't come up with one that wouldn't damage Olivia in some way. His concern for her overrode his normal instincts for self-preservation so completely that he hardly recognized himself."
quote: "Charles finished his lengthy recap of the promotion's success and stepped back next to T.J. Shouts rang out again, and the mob surged closer. The limo waiting at the curb might as well have been miles rather than yards away, since they'd have to push through the assembled reporters to reach it."
quote: "Olivia stepped forward, and Matt watched her square her shoulders and clear her throat. He braced himself for whatever was to come."
quote: "\"There is no way to satisfactorily explain what went on in this apartment, and I'm not going to try.\" There were groans of protest and more shouted questions, but Olivia stood firm. \"I'll just say that I'm glad the week produced such great results for the food bank, I'm thrilled our listeners responded in such a generous way.\" She flashed a wry smile. \"And being locked up for a week with Matt Ransom is enough to drive any woman to desperation.\""
quote: "She turned to him, the tenseness of her body belying the smile on her face and the casual tone of her words. Then she waited, without a word, for him to cut her off at the knees."
quote: "Matt felt a swift burst of pride at her bravery. Because he wanted to, and because he knew she wouldn't flinch away from him in front of an audience, he stepped up and slung one arm across her shoulders. Then he gave her an exaggerated wink. She tensed but managed to stay put, her smile firmly in place as he said, \"Well, if you can cop an insanity plea, I guess I can, too.\" He turned his gaze to the waiting reporters, taking in their sharp-faced curiosity. \"All I have to say is . . . ditto.\""
quote: "Without waiting for a response, the reporter flung out another question. \"Did you really bet your staff you'd have Dr. Moore flat on her back before the week was out?\""
quote: "Matt watched the outrage suffuse Olivia's face. He lowered his voice and said, \"It's not the way it sounds, Olivia.\""
quote: "The outrage turned to disgust. For a long moment she stared at him as if he were a form of plankton, and then she shook off his arm and plunged forward down the apartment steps."
quote: "Like offensive guards protecting their quarterback, the burly duo sprang into action. One of them caught up with Olivia while the other fell in at Matt's side. Together, they cleared a path through the crowd to the getaway car. Matt could hear the whir of camera motor drives and frantic footsteps following them down the sidewalk, while the same questions echoed in the morning air."
quote: "Matt slid onto the bench seat after Olivia. Crankower and T.J. dove into the facing seat, the door slammed behind them, and the car pulled away from the curb."
quote: "Matt and Olivia continued to stare out their respective windows. Olivia held her body away from his, and when they rounded a curve she was careful not to allow herself to touch him. He could feel the hurt and anger rolling off her in waves."
quote: "\"All right. I guess a nice, friendly 'No comment' could be considered appropriate in a situation like this,\" T.J. said."
quote: "Olivia continued to stare out her window, ignoring all of them."
quote: "He turned to the promotions man beside him. \"Charles, get Diane and Ben on the phone and tell them to pull 'best of' programs to air today. We'll drop Olivia and Matt off at their homes, let them get some rest, and we'll all meet back at the station this afternoon.\""
quote: "The limo turned into Olivia's neighborhood and took a left onto her street. They sat, with the engine idling outside of Olivia's house. Only T.J. had anything to say. \"In light of the, um, rather spectacular ending of the promotion, I've asked the consultant to conduct a final focus group and an additional call-out to gauge audience reaction. I'll have his report and Detroit's reaction by the time we meet.\""
quote: "The first person Olivia ran into at the station was Matt. Refusing to greet him, she stood and waited for the elevator in silence. They rode up with three co-workers who could barely contain their curiosity. The two men slapped Matt heartily on the back, and she suspected if she hadn't been present they would have congratulated him as well. The woman in the car just looked on pityingly, before averting her gaze. It was chillingly reminiscent of the kind of reaction she'd gotten when word of James's cheating had gotten around, and too much like the glances she'd given her own mother when she'd played the doormat for Olivia's father."
quote: "She and Matt traversed the endless hallway to T.J.'s office under continued scrutiny. Conversations died and movement ceased as each person they passed took time out from gossiping to study the objects of their speculation."
quote: "Was it her imagination, or did Matt seem to walk taller with each step as she shrank ever lower in embarrassment? She fanned the flames of her anger and told herself it didn't matter. Already she was trying to formulate the words she would say during tomorrow's show to square things with her audience. Assuming she still had one when this meeting was over."
quote: "Outside T.J.'s office, Matt took her arm and pulled her around to face him. Onlookers fell silent as they strained to listen."
quote: "\"I didn't set you up, Olivia. I was just as surprised as you were when I looked up and saw that we were on camera.\""
quote: "Olivia jerked her arm out of Matt's grasp. \"Right. Well then, that solves everything, doesn't it? And your whole campaign to help me relax had no motive other than improving my quality of life? Come on, Matt. This is me, Olivia, remember?\""
quote: "\"Oh, I remember all right. Maybe better than you do. And I'll admit that I did think throwing you a bit off balance might be helpful. But that was only at first, before . . .\""
quote: "Olivia's thoughts turned back to the meals he'd cooked for her, the soap operas he'd introduced her to, the spirit of fun he'd brought to their captivity—all of it a calculated effort to put him in the winner's circle."
quote: "\"Before you decided to get me—how did that reporter put it—flat on my back?\""
quote: "\"And I suppose it wasn't you who told everybody about Chicago? Did you tell them how you had me flat on my back there, too, until you decided you were finished with me?\""
quote: "\"I'd have to be a fool to believe anything you said to me now. And all appearances to the contrary, I'm not a fool.\" She turned her back on him and stormed into T.J.'s office."
quote: "T.J., Charles, Ben, and Diane were already waiting. Olivia sat next to her producer, while Matt took a seat next to Ben, the battle lines clearly drawn. No one spoke as T.J. flipped through the folder on his lap. \"So,\" he inquired casually, \"did either of you rest?\""
quote: "\"Don't worry, I'm only a little tempted,\" Matt dead-panned."
quote: "Olivia tried to imagine her listeners putting up with that. Her heart sank every time she thought about her audience's reaction to the whole ugly mess."
quote: "The intense media scrutiny just made it worse. Even if their numbers ended up statistically too close to call, Olivia knew she'd become a liability. She was a dispenser of advice who couldn't control her own actions, a radio therapist who didn't know how to deal with men."
quote: "Diane and Ben fidgeted in their seats, and Olivia envied their energy. She felt too tired and heavy to move, though her brain continued to function at warp speed. Matt looked calm and unconcerned, though she knew him well enough now to know it was just a pose. Crankower appeared even more starched than usual."
quote: "T.J. closed the folder and began. \"Bottom line,\" he said, \"this promotion has been a huge success.\""
quote: "Charles preened like a peacock. He stood and took a brief bow before T.J. continued. \"Matt and Olivia are already getting national attention. Plus, we know the numbers are going to be great, which means new advertisers will be tripping over themselves to sign on the dotted line.\""
quote: "Olivia leaned forward in her chair. \"But what about the research? There's no way my listeners are okay with what happened between . . . well, what happened.\""
quote: "\"No, they're not. Your credibility has suffered, and your core audience is furious,\" T.J. said. \"They haven't tuned out, yet, but they feel betrayed and angry. Sixty percent of your P1's don't approve of your behavior.\""
quote: "Olivia clenched her fists. She was dying to stand and pace. \"And you consider this a success?\""
quote: "\"Yes.\" T.J.'s smile was blinding. \"You've more than offset any potential loss with new listeners. You picked up P1's who already consider WTLK their station of preference but hadn't listened to you before, and 95 percent of P2's responded favorably to Liv Live. It won't take much to turn them into a P1 audience.\""
quote: "\"You've come out of this smelling like a rose. Your P1's are totally with you, and 85 percent of P2's like you.\""
quote: "\"So, what does this mean in terms of who stays on the air?\" Ben wanted to know."
quote: "\"What?\" Matt, Ben, and Diane sounded like a Greek chorus."
quote: "\"Matt's Gravy Train, I'm Alpo,\" Olivia bit out. \"But you're wrong, T.J.\" She looked directly at Matt. \"Regardless of what the numbers say, if I've lost the trust and respect of my audience, I've lost. Period.\""
quote: "Feeling every bit as betrayed and angry as her core audience, Olivia slung her purse over her shoulder and stood. \"That would make you the winner and reigning champ, Matt. Congratulations. You worked hard for it.\""
quote: "Olivia stared T.J. in the eye. \"You're the one who doesn't get it. Those P1's and P2's aren't just numbers to me. They're people with issues and problems, and I've let them down. Now I have to figure out how to make them understand something I don't even understand myself.\" She shook her head in disgust. \"I'm not interested in hearing what Detroit wants right now. My agent will be in touch when I am.\""
quote: "\"Olivia, please,\" T.J. called out, but Olivia marched across the room and out of the office without a backward glance."
quote: "For a tense moment no one spoke, and then the recriminations started."
quote: "Diane glowered at Matt. \"Everything would have been fine if you'd fought fair.\""
quote: "\"We all heard you bragging about how you'd have her flat on her back. I never thought you'd be able to do it. I should have warned her.\" Diane wrung her hands."
quote: "Matt shook his head. \"That was just talk. I'm not the one who told us our shows were at risk and locked us in a peanut-sized apartment for a week.\" He stood and crossed over to tower over Charles and T.J. as realization dawned. \"This was bullshit all along, wasn't it? You just used the budget thing to get us in there.\""
quote: "Only Charles was stupid enough not to look shocked at the accusation."
quote: "\"And then you turned on a camera and let us perform.\" Matt's anger grew, and he focused all of it on Charles. \"Ben told me you were always fooling with that camera, Crankower. I should have paid more attention. You were just waiting for your chance, weren't you? I assume you're the one who told the press about Chicago?\""
quote: "\"It's not a state secret. It's right there in your résumés.\" The Promotion Director sounded smug."
quote: "\"Now, gentlemen.\" T.J.'s tone was conciliatory, but Charles didn't seem to perceive the danger."
quote: "\"I wouldn't be so self-righteous, Ransom,\" Charles sneered. \"We just got you into the apartment. What happened there was your own doing.\""
quote: "At seven-thirty Tuesday morning, Olivia backed her car down her driveway, past the waiting group of reporters, and on to WTLK with all the enthusiasm of someone about to face a firing squad."
quote: "After watching Jay Leno poke fun at her expense, she'd spent much of the night nursing her anger at the station and its corporate parent, and the rest of it trying to understand her feelings for Matt. She'd hoped for a healing night's sleep. Instead she'd spent it tossing and turning and attempting to gain some understanding of what had happened to her."
quote: "As she alternately pounded her pillow and paced the rooms of her home, she told herself she hated Matt Ransom, that this whole mess was entirely his fault, and that what had happened between them belonged in the category of really great sex, not serious lovemaking. But a part of her wanted to believe she hadn't imagined the connection she'd felt, that there'd been something real between them—something she could understand and somehow find a way to explain to her audience."
quote: "She would have liked to whip herself into a frenzy of indignation, but her conscience wouldn't allow it. Much as she wanted to, she couldn't deny how alive she felt when she was with him. Or how much she'd enjoyed sparring with him, eating with him, even cleaning up after him. Getting to know him over a meal had been a gift. He wasn't the same man he'd been in Chicago, even though he kept trying to act like he was. And when he'd had the chance to ruin her completely, he hadn't taken it."
quote: "Leaving her car in the underground garage, Olivia took the elevator to the station lobby. During the ride up she teased herself with fantasies of breaking through Matt's defensive armor to the rich bed of feeling she suspected lay underneath. And then she chided herself for being such an optimist, because really, what were the chances that he'd ever let her or anyone else in?"
quote: "Diane met her in the control room with a smile, a hug, and a box of Krispy Kreme donuts."
quote: "Diane shrugged. \"Just think of it as the Dozen-Donuts-a-Day Diet. I figured we could both use a little pick-me-up.\""
quote: "Olivia helped herself to a glazed chocolate donut. \"Today I'll take my comfort any way I can get it. How about you, Di? Are you ready for whatever comes?\""
quote: "\"I think so. I fielded some pretty hostile calls yesterday. You have a lot of listeners who aren't at all happy about what happened with Matt.\""
quote: "\"I can't say that I blame them.\" Dread pooled in the pit of Olivia's stomach. \"I'm not too happy about it myself.\""
quote: "Diane studied her. \"Did you hear what happened after you left the meeting yesterday?\""
quote: "Olivia bit into her donut and tried to appear disinterested."
quote: "\"Matt punched Crankower and knocked him right out. He accused him of framing up that final shot and telling the press you and Matt had a thing for each other in Chicago.\""
quote: "\"Oh, yeah. Charles made one last snide comment, and Matt coldcocked him. And he told T.J. off, too.\""
quote: "\"Well, what do you know?\" Olivia marveled. \"Maybe Matt has a few heroic bones in his body after all.\" She tucked the thought away for future consideration and turned to the business at hand. \"All right, Diane. Stash the donuts and let's do radio. You find me a good first caller to set the tone, and I'll take it from there, okay?\""
quote: "Olivia tuned out the bustle around her as she sat down in front of the microphone."
quote: "In the wee hours of the morning, she'd finally decided that for this show she'd have to go with the flow; not exactly her forte, and something that would have been out of the question a week ago. She wondered if Matt would tune in as he had during the last week, and the mental picture of Crankower crumpled on the floor brought a reluctant smile to her lips."
quote: "Her theme music played itself out, but when she checked the monitor to see how many callers were waiting, the screen was blank. Her smile disappeared, and her heart plummeted as she looked through the plate glass at Diane. Her producer grimaced and shrugged in apology. Taking a deep breath, Olivia went on the air alone."
quote: "\"The bottom line here is, I'm only human.\" She paused to let that sink in. \"I'm a trained therapist, and I think as an uninvolved third party, I bring new insight to your problems and issues.\" She caught Diane's eye and shrugged as her tone turned wry. \"It's not always so easy to do the same for myself.\""
quote: "Olivia wanted desperately to stand and pace the small space, but she was tied to the microphone and through it to her audience. As she spoke to her listeners, certain basic truths that she had avoided facing during the long, grueling week became clear. She doubted anyone was more surprised than she was at the words that came out of her mouth."
quote: "\"I have feelings for Matt Ransom that are not easily defined. I first knew him when I was way too young, and it ended badly. The only feelings I could admit to before this week were hurt and anger. But there's more than that.\""
quote: "Olivia saw Diane take a call, and as she talked, additional phone calls came in."
quote: "She folded her hands on the table in front of her as she continued. \"I haven't cut you one inch of slack. But when it came to myself, well, I took a lot of rope and hung myself with it. I couldn't admit that what I felt for Matt could be anything more than righteous anger and disdain. And ultimately lust.\""
quote: "She saw Diane go still in the control room and imagined a hush falling over the station. She wondered where Matt was and wondered, again, if he was listening."
quote: "\"What you saw Sunday night was my totally misguided attempt to force Matt Ransom to own up to his feelings for me. You see, I wanted and expected him to do something I couldn't even do myself. Denial is an incredible thing. I focused on his shortcomings, his walls, his methods of coping, and I found them unsatisfactory. But I refused to take a look at my own.\""
quote: "All the phone lines were lit up now. Diane typed frantically on her keyboard, but Olivia couldn't stop talking. She had to come clean."
quote: "\"So you see, I'm a fraud. Not because I couldn't resist Matt Ransom, but because I couldn't follow my own advice.\""
quote: "The truth hit her then like the proverbial ton of bricks. She was in love with Matt Ransom. Still. Always. Her mouth snapped shut as the realization sank in. All the anger, all the jealousy, all the mind-numbing sexual tension were obvious indications of the intensity of her feelings for the man, and she had managed to deny or rationalize every single reaction."
quote: "Stooping to his level, and in the most inept way possible, she had tried to force him to admit that she was more important to him than the other women who'd wandered in and out of his life."
quote: "\"Matt Ransom is juvenile and completely annoying.\" She paused, and when she continued, she could hear the horror in her voice. \"And I seem to be in love with him.\""
quote: "Olivia fell silent as the ramifications of what she'd said began to sink in. She was in love with Matt Ransom. She was in love with a man who treated women as conveniences, a man who had erected walls around his heart that were all but unscalable and then topped them with twists of barbed wire to discourage even the most foolhardy."
quote: "Was she really that foolhardy? Olivia scanned the list of waiting callers, hoping against hope that Matt's name would be among them. In her little fantasy world, he would hear her admission of love and, zing, he too would realize that they were destined to be together. Right. And then he'd propose to her on the air. And carry her off to Never Land to play with the other lost boys. She'd have to change her name to Wendy. And move to London."
quote: "\"So.\" She finally noticed Diane's frantic hand signals. \"So I guess I'll take a call while we all let that little bombshell sink in. Let's see . . .\""
quote: "She noticed JoBeth's name on the monitor and put her on the air."
quote: "\"Gee, Dr. O.\" JoBeth sounded almost as uncertain as Olivia felt. \"I kind of hate to interrupt.\""
quote: "\"Well, I'm still trying to decide what to do,\" JoBeth said. \"I mean, both you and Matt said that if I wanted to get married and Dawg didn't, that I should move on.\""
quote: "\"Yep.\" JoBeth sounded far too resigned for a woman contemplating marriage. Olivia could still remember settling for James when all she'd wanted was Matt. Today, of all days, she didn't want to see JoBeth make the same mistake."
quote: "\"I know,\" said Olivia. \"But I think I've already given you more answers than I should have. It's time to start trusting your gut.\""
quote: "Of course, it was her gut that had prompted her to make such an outrageously public confession, and all she had to show for it was a hollow feeling in the pit of her stomach and a dim ache in the region of her heart. The potential for even greater humiliation loomed on the horizon."
quote: "At the signal from Diane, Olivia ended the call and waited out the scheduled commercial break."
quote: "She knew that if Matt hadn't been tuned in when she signed on, someone must have clued him in by now, but although lots of callers were waiting, not a single one of them was Matt. She thought about the baggage he carried with him, about the loss and pain he'd buried so deeply, and wished he'd let her help him through it. More than anything, she wanted him to be free to love her back in a way she could accept."
quote: "Coming out of the break, Olivia considered how she would have counseled a caller in her predicament. She'd told JoBeth and countless others to pursue their dreams and go after what they wanted."
quote: "It was her misfortune to want Matt Ransom, but want him she did—all of him, on a permanent basis, and in every possible way. It was time to start scaling a few walls and long past time to start practicing what she preached."
quote: "In a healthy relationship both parties shared their thoughts and feelings. Expectations were to be . . . expected. She was entitled to know how Matt felt about her."
quote: "She closed her eyes and took a deep breath. Her heart hammered in her chest."
quote: "\"As I mentioned earlier, I, uh, seem to be in love with Matt Ransom.\" She paused. \"And I think the time has come to find out how Matt feels about me.\""
quote: "Her hands shook, but it was too late to turn back now. \"If you're out there, Matt, you need to pick up a phone and give me a call. And you need to be ready to share.\""
quote: "Olivia did another scan of waiting callers, but Matt's name still wasn't among them. Her mouth was dry, and she felt strangely light-headed, but in her heart she knew she owed it to both of them to be clear about what she wanted."
quote: "Matt considered calling Olivia for all of five seconds. He'd been in the shower when she signed on, toweling off when she first uttered the L-word, and breaking out in a cold sweat by the time she challenged him to call."
quote: "Tucking a towel around his hips, he wiped steam off the bathroom mirror and caught a glimpse of his face. Grooves of panic sliced across his forehead, and his eyes were those of a cornered animal. His usual expression of detached amusement was nowhere to be found. Olivia had turned the tables on him so neatly, he had no idea what he felt or how to respond."
quote: "Matt covered his cheeks with shaving cream and jerked the razor downward, nicking an ear in the process. He couldn't imagine what Olivia was thinking, but if she expected him to call and \"share\" his innermost feelings on demand, she was living in a fantasy world screwier than the one she'd accused him of inhabiting."
quote: "He'd call her when he was good and ready and had some earthly idea of what to say. And not a moment before."
quote: "In the meantime, he'd put some miles between them. He was way overdue for a trip home to Chicago. This was an excellent opportunity to catch up with his mother and sister and spend some quality time with his nephews. The station could go find some other trained monkey to fill in for him. After the shit they'd pulled, he didn't owe them squat."
quote: "Matt added clean clothes to the duffel bag still sitting on his bedroom floor and called the station, refusing to talk to anyone but T.J. Then he backed the car out of the garage and headed toward I-75, where he pointed the nose of the Corvette north and applied his foot firmly to the accelerator."
quote: "He spent the next 422 miles trying to fathom the turn his life had taken. He still couldn't believe Crankower and T.J. had pulled off such a sordid little scheme, any more than he could come to terms with the whole mess between himself and Olivia. Once again she'd managed to scale walls he'd spent years erecting, and once again she wanted to drag him to a place he'd sworn he'd never go."
quote: "She'd made him talk about Adam, forced him to share feelings he'd kept locked away for a lifetime, and no matter how hard he tried, she refused to let him slide back to his comfort zone. Olivia Moore expected more of him than any woman ever had, and it annoyed the hell out of him that some perverse part of him wanted to give it to her."
quote: "He stopped for the night at a Holiday Inn just north of Louisville and was registered by a smiling, pink-cheeked college student who seemed younger than he'd ever been. She actually blushed when she asked him if he was traveling on his own, and he told himself it was only fatigue that stopped him from inviting her to join him for dinner."
quote: "While driving, he'd purposely left his cell phone in his bag in the trunk so he wouldn't be tempted to use it, but he pulled it out now to call an old friend who lived in the area. His next call would be to his sister to let her know when to expect him."
quote: "All he was looking for was a little R and R, a little time to regroup and get his head back on straight. There was no reason at all why he couldn't hang with friends and enjoy himself a little."
quote: "As far as Matt was concerned, there wasn't a damn thing wrong with Never Land as long as you still knew how to fly."
quote: "JoBeth handled the overflow lunch crowd on automatic pilot. She waited on customers and cleared tables, smiling and nodding her head at what felt like the right moments. It was a damn good thing her mouth and body could work independently of her brain, because her brain was full of the question Dr. O had raised the day before. And her gut was too busy churning to provide her with an answer."
quote: "She wanted to fall in love with Kevin Middleton. She already loved his mountain house and the lifestyle he offered, but every time she tried to examine her feelings for him, her brain shut down and her stomach hurt."
quote: "At three o'clock she untied her apron and clocked out. All the way home she told herself she was finished with Dawg, that Kevin deserved a chance. That there didn't have to be wild heart-throbbing love for a relationship to work. But the thought of never feeling that again filled her with such sadness she wanted to cry."
quote: "By the time she got home and parked in the drive, she had calmed down enough to think rationally. She was too old to worry about true love and old enough to appreciate the importance of compromise. Two people who shared the same vision could build a life together, she told herself. She could live without excitement and passionate lovemaking if she got children and security and respect in return. And she knew she could make Kevin Middleton happy."
quote: "But not to hold Dawg in her arms again? Never to feel him settle inside her and rock her world to pieces? Could she really live without that?"
quote: "JoBeth spent the rest of the afternoon cleaning house. She chased nonexistent dust bunnies out of corners, wiped baseboards that already gleamed with fresh paint, and took a toothbrush to the newly installed tile in the guest bathroom. While she worked, her head and her heart battled, her brain arguing the logic of a life with Kevin Middleton, her heart clinging stubbornly to its memories of Dawg Rollins."
quote: "By six o'clock her tiny house sparkled. Spent, JoBeth poured herself a tall glass of sweet tea and carried it out to the porch, where she sat and rocked for a time, studying the bright yellow daffodils that bordered the walkway and testing her resolve."
quote: "She would go for moderately-happy-ever-after with Kevin Middleton. She would settle for less than a love match in exchange for the family she wanted to build, and she would make it work. But not before she had one last night with Dawg."
quote: "There was nothing like rejection to put a woman in touch with her insecurities. As Olivia rediscovered in the aftermath of her confession, neither education, occupation, nor social position could prevent a woman from falling into the pit of self-doubt. Nor could they predict how long it would take her to claw her way back out."
quote: "Despite her training and the years spent counseling others, Olivia Moore, Ph.D., handled Matt's rejection in much the same way early cavewoman must have handled hers when her Neanderthal man used his club to drag another woman back to the cave. That is to say, she handled it badly."
quote: "For two point five days she wallowed and paced. And paced and wallowed. Not even James's betrayal and the resulting divorce had shaken her so completely."
quote: "And then on Friday afternoon, when it was finally possible to leave town without looking like she was running away, she took a flight to Tampa and picked up a rental car for the drive over the Howard Frankland Bridge to St. Petersburg. With her hair whipping around her face and the salt-tinged air filling her lungs, she followed the familiar scent to the Gulf of Mexico where a small beach road took her toward the southernmost tip of Pass-A-GRILLE."
quote: "New multimillion-dollar homes dotted the sandy white beach, but there were still plenty of small funky beach cottages lazing under the swaying palms. It was in front of one of these, on the corner of a tiny street that stretched from the beach to the bay side, that Olivia parked."
quote: "The house was hers, bought with her first radio money and held on to with steely determination through the chaos of her divorce. It had a faded picket fence, a crabgrass-and-sand lawn, a sagging front porch, and gulls wheeling in the blue sky. Less than a block away, the waves kissed up to the shore."
quote: "Olivia breathed in the damp salt air and felt her heart lighten a notch. She and James had lived in a well-manicured north Tampa suburb, but this had always been her preferred retreat. It was a place for getting heart and head in line, and its magic had never failed her."
quote: "Pulling her bag and a sack of groceries from the car, Olivia held the screen door out of the way and fit her key into the ancient lock. Minutes later every window in the house had been thrown open to the late afternoon breeze, and she and her glass of wine were outside beside a sand dune, waiting for the sun to sink into the sea."
quote: "On Saturday and Sunday she woke with the sun and crossed to the beach to begin her trek toward the northernmost tip of St. Pete Beach, where she sat at a concession stand with an egg sandwich and orange juice and people-watched until she was ready to head back down the beach again. She walked countless miles under blue skies stuffed with cotton-ball clouds, and the slap of hard-packed sand against the soles of her feet soothed her in a way indoor pacing never had."
quote: "In the afternoon she lathered on sunscreen and stretched out on a blanket to read. Or gave herself up to the enjoyment of the ever-changing light that danced across the swells, reassured to see that fiddler crabs still scurried across the wet sand, and seagulls still knew how to cage food from the less savvy tourists. All the while her mind whirled with the jumble of thoughts and feelings that had brought her here."
quote: "By Sunday evening her hurt and humiliation had been tempered by a new sense of calm. She'd been honest and ultimately true to herself and her feelings, just as she counseled her listeners to be. Matt Ransom was either uninterested or unable to do the same."
quote: "Early Monday morning as she flew back to Atlanta, the concept of survival was still very much on her mind. Women survived heartache and disappointment all the time, and daily demands that men could never fathom. An idea mushroomed as she worked her way out of Hartsfield Airport and into the flow of rush-hour traffic."
quote: "JoBeth reached across Dawg to switch off the alarm clock before it rang. The move brought her breast in direct contact with his arm, and she saw him smile automatically in his sleep."
quote: "She wasn't sure why she'd set the alarm, when she'd had no intention of sleeping. At 3 A.M., when he finally drifted off after their last round of lovemaking, she'd propped herself up on one elbow to watch him breathe, not wanting to miss a single minute of her last night with Dawg."
quote: "\"Mmmm.\" Dawg reached out one big hand and ran it slowly down the curve of her hip. His eyes remained closed, but hers were riveted on the familiar planes and angles of his face and the golden morning stubble that covered it."
quote: "Her gaze traveled down the massive chest with its curly golden-gray mat of hair. He was warm and solid and smelled of their lovemaking. Quietly she drank him in, branding this man and this moment into her memory forever."
quote: "When she couldn't ignore the clock any longer, JoBeth eased gently out of bed, careful not to wake him, and walked to the bathroom, closing the door behind her."
quote: "It was the muted sound of the shower that penetrated Dawg's sleep-filled brain, but it was the image of JoBeth climbing in all dewy and delicious that brought him fully awake. Rolling over and stretching contentedly, he considered joining her."
quote: "Instead he lay there grinning. Lord, he felt good. Tired, even a little bit sore from all the gymnastics, but deep down good and satisfied."
quote: "He'd just hit town after a run up to the Northeast when he picked up the message from JoBeth. It had been too many days since he'd seen her, too many days in the cab of his rig with nothing to think about but their relationship. Days he'd used to hash out his feelings. For the first time, he was ready to discuss what might come next."
quote: "Dawg settled onto his back and pillowed his head in his hands. He could hear JoBeth singing in the shower, and he grinned again as his mind played over the night they'd spent together."
quote: "She'd greeted him at her front door wearing the crotchless black teddy he'd given her for her birthday. When he'd tried to tell her what he'd been thinking about their relationship, she'd put a finger over his lips to shush him and crawled into his lap. All the blood in his body had immediately rushed to his head, and he didn't mean the one that supported his baseball cap."
quote: "She'd teased him with the crotchless lingerie until he'd been wild with wanting her. He'd dropped his pants and taken her the first time while she bent way over into the refrigerator, supposedly looking for a bottle of wine. And a second time on the living room floor after she undressed him in the candlelight."
quote: "By the time they made it to the bedroom, the only sounds he was making were groans of ecstasy. It was a night he'd remember until the day he died."
quote: "Dawg blinked and sat up in bed as he realized just how strange JoBeth's behavior had been. She'd always been a willing sexual partner, and they'd passed some great hours in bed, but he couldn't remember her ever being quite so aggressive. And why hadn't she wanted to talk?"
quote: "He swung his legs over the side of the bed and stood. After a brief knock on the bathroom door, he pushed it open."
quote: "\"JoBeth, why don't you come on out here and sit down so we can talk about us?\""
quote: "He watched her wrap the white terry bath towel around her body and tuck one end in above her breasts."
quote: "\"Can't do it, Dawg. I'm already late for work.\""
quote: "His eyes narrowed. \"But what if I have something I want to tell you? What if I want to—\""
quote: "She stepped forward and put a finger over his lips just like she had the night before. \"No, Dawg. Let's not spoil what we've just had. Didn't you think it was the most awesome night?\""
quote: "She picked up a brush from the bathroom counter and ran it through her short curls. Her face glowed, and her lips looked all shiny and kissable."
quote: "\"There's really nothing to talk about,\" she said. \"I'm still floating on air from all the lovin' you gave me.\""
quote: "He heard the word \"love\" and opened his mouth to tell her what he'd been thinking, but she put her finger to his lips again and brushed by him on her way into the bedroom."
quote: "He followed her, trying to figure out just what was going on, and got there in time to watch her drop her towel and wiggle into a lacy white bra and panties."
quote: "\"I really have to run. Noreen'll never be able to handle the breakfast rush without me.\""
quote: "She stepped into her uniform and pulled it up. Moving in front of him, she presented her back for zipping. He obliged and then put his hands on her shoulders, thinking he'd turn her around so they could talk, but she slipped out of his grasp and scurried over to the closet, where she poked around until she located her white cushioned loafers."
quote: "\"I'm sorry to have to run off like this, Dawg. There's coffee in the cupboard and some muffins in the bread box.\" She smiled sweetly, but he was starting to think he'd been had. \"Will you lock the door behind you when you leave? You don't need a key to do it.\""
quote: "\"JoBeth, why don't you just call in sick? I have something I want to tell you.\""
quote: "\"Sorry, can't do it.\" She went up on tiptoe, gave him a friendly peck on the cheek, and practically ran out the front door."
quote: "Dawg watched the door swing shut. In the empty living room he muttered, \"I guess I won't be needin' to get down on one knee today.\" And wondered why he didn't feel relieved."
quote: "Olivia punched up the music she'd asked Diane to put together, a compilation of female affirmations from the seventies and eighties. Helen Reddy's \"I Am Woman\" bled seamlessly into Gloria Gaynor's \"I Will Survive\" as Olivia prepped her listeners."
quote: "\"My recent experiences have forced me to take an all-too-personal look into the male psyche, and I have to tell you it's not pretty in there. In my opinion women are looking for answers, while men—at least the kind of men who dwell in places like Never Land and Fantasy Island— are busy trying to duck the questions. Today's show is about coping with reality, women's reality."
quote: "\"My declaration last week, and Matt Ransom's lack of response, is a prime example of how differently men and women handle their lives. I find myself wondering how many men could survive even one day as a woman.\""
quote: "\"Your job is to help figure out what hoops they have to jump through.\""
quote: "Olivia brought the instrumental track of \"I Will Survive\" up full and then took it under. A glance at the monitor showed callers stacked up and eager to play the game."
quote: "\"Okay, I've got Miranda on the air,\" Olivia said. \"What else do you think our contestants should have with them?\""
quote: "\"The family dog,\" Miranda chirped. \"She's in heat, wearing diapers, and the kids are asking questions.\""
quote: "\"I think they should have to shave their legs and wear makeup.\""
quote: "\"It's the middle of summer and they have to wear panty hose—the twelve-dollar-a-pair kind that run just before a big presentation. And high heels with pointy little toes.\""
quote: "\"Been there, done that.\" Olivia smiled. \"And why don't we go ahead and outlaw fast food while we're at it? I think our contestants should have to cook everything they serve.\" She smiled again as the number of waiting calls doubled. \"Hi, Tina. You're on the air.\""
quote: "\"Hi, Dr. O. I think we should make them do the laundry and clean up after a sick kid at 2 A.M. And I don't think they should be allowed to watch television until the kids are asleep and all the chores are done.\""
quote: "\"Cool.\" Olivia grinned evilly. \"And let's make sure none of the TVs have a remote.\""
quote: "Diane punched up a sound effect of gasps of horror while Olivia kept the music low underneath."
quote: "\"This is your fantasy, ladies. Don't hold back,\" Olivia said as she took another call. \"Carmen, it's your turn. Tell me what you have in store for our contestants.\""
quote: "\"I'd like to see them sit through a PTA meeting and accurately report the results. Or build a model of Mount Vesuvius out of flour and water—the night before it's due. Better yet, let's let them convince a three-year-old to eat a spoonful of peas.\""
quote: "Carmen laughed. \"Yeah. Real life can take a lot more out of you than the Australian Outback or the Dark Continent.\""
quote: "Olivia couldn't help smiling as she prepared to segue into the commercial break. \"You know, if we throw in potty training and trying to get the opposite sex to admit their feelings, our contestants will be begging to get voted out.\""
quote: "Matt stepped onto the front porch of the home he'd grown up in. It was a low, sprawling house built in the once popular Prairie style, and like the more impressive Victorians and Tudors that dotted the tree-lined Northside Chicago neighborhood, it had been painstakingly maintained."
quote: "He rang the bell and soon saw his mother's figure approaching through the art glass inset in the old wooden door. He could still remember her shouts of \"Don't slam it, you'll break the glass,\" but couldn't remember a time he or Adam had ever heeded the warning."
quote: "The door swung open, and his mother stood there. Before the smile lit her face, for just that instant before she caught herself, her gaze swung to Matt's right, where Adam had always stood. And even after twenty-three years, she seemed surprised to find him missing."
quote: "In the past he would have ignored it, made a joke, let it go, but thanks to Olivia's damned interference, he'd spent too many hours remembering, and he was too raw for that. \"You've never once looked at me without wishing Adam were here.\""
quote: "The smile froze on her lips, and he knew she wanted to deny it, but the truth radiated from the brown eyes she'd passed on to both her sons. \"No,\" she admitted. \"I haven't.\""
quote: "Matt opened his mouth expecting to make a typically glib response, but came out with, \"And I've been trying to live a big enough life for Adam and me. I'm not sure how much longer I can keep it up.\""
quote: "He wasn't sure which of them was more surprised."
quote: "\"Goodness, Matthew. Whatever happened to 'hello'?\" Margaret Ransom went up on tiptoe to peck his cheek."
quote: "He saw the shimmer of tears in her eyes and watched her blink them away before she turned on her heel to lead the way into the kitchen. He felt like a complete and utter shit."
quote: "\"Your sister and the children are here. She and Dan just got back from Italy, and she's made us some of her new specialty. It's something, something over fettuccine.\""
quote: "Matt dropped his bag in the foyer and followed his mother into the heart of the house. Funny that he thought of it that way when it was he and Sandra who had forced that heart to beat. He stepped into the kitchen and sniffed appreciatively, determined to drop the introspection and get back on more familiar emotional ground. He enjoyed food and cooked for his own amusement, but his sister had channeled their childhood discovery into an increasingly successful Italian restaurant."
quote: "\"What's that I smell? Pomodoro? Marinara? Something smells downright incredible.\""
quote: "Matt's nephews jumped up and threw themselves at him while his older sister looked on with an affectionate smile. \"Downright? I think someone's been in the South too long.\""
quote: "He ruffled the twins' hair. \"Ya'll think I have a funny accent?\""
quote: "Kyle and Kenny giggled and tried to reach his head to ruffle him back."
quote: "\"Hey, I'd be careful how I treated the uncle who's holding some fine seats for tomorrow night's Cubs game.\""
quote: "There were shrieks of joy as Matt held up the proof. \"Dugout level. Seven P.M. Be there or be square.\""
quote: "\"Matt Ransom, tomorrow night is a school night. The boys have—\""
quote: "He walked to his sister and bussed her on the cheek. \"Chill out, San. When you're nine and your uncle comes to town, baseball is required. You and Dan can come, too, if you behave.\""
quote: "He reached past her to the stove, lifted the lid of the largest pot, and studied its contents. \"Here I thought you'd learned something new and exotic during your travels, but I see you're still relying on Ragú.\""
quote: "Sandra grabbed the lid back and pushed him out of the way. \"Ha. You know better than to use that word in my presence. Now open that bottle of wine, pronto. I want to try this dish out on you.\""
quote: "Just as she'd hoped, the trip to the beach had broken Olivia's cycle of wallowing and hiding. She still had trouble falling asleep, and she woke way too early, but now she made a point of putting those late-night and predawn hours to good use."
quote: "There she funneled her energy into her callers and their problems, squashing speculation about why Matt hadn't called and shrugging off offers of sympathy with a \"win some, lose some\" philosophy she wished she could actually feel."
quote: "She knew from experience that if she continued to pretend that she was fine, at some point she would be. So she threw her shoulders back, held her head high, and strode through her life with all the gusto she could muster. Inside she was a quivering mass of Jell-O, but since nobody could see inside, she managed to keep the wobbliness to herself."
quote: "Worse, she couldn't bypass a Braves game on TV, and her skill with the remote was improving at an alarming rate."
quote: "Diane was the only person who seemed aware of the terrible dichotomy between Olivia's outer calm and her inner turmoil, and Olivia suspected her producer's latest diet and exercise regimen had as much to do with trying to keep an eye on Olivia as it did with improving her health."
quote: "Olivia sat on her front porch step waiting for Diane to arrive for their after-dinner walk. The evening was mild, and the shouts of children playing in a nearby cul-de-sac mingled with the hum of a lawn mower two houses away. When Diane pulled up to the curb, Olivia ambled down the driveway to greet her. After a few discreet stretches, they began their walk."
quote: "At the half-mile mark Diane announced, \"I swore off Twinkies this afternoon.\""
quote: "\"And I'm thinking about working with a personal trainer.\""
quote: "\"That's great, too. I'm glad to see you so serious about your new exercise program.\" Olivia smiled and picked up the pace. They walked for a whole minute before Diane asked, \"So have you heard anything from Matt?\""
quote: "Olivia stumbled over an uneven spot in the sidewalk and took her time righting herself. \"No.\" She eyed her producer, but couldn't bring herself to ask the same question in return."
quote: "As it turned out, Diane required little to no pumping. She got a little heel-toe action going and swung her bent arms as she confided, \"Ben says Matt's out of town, but he doesn't know for how long.\""
quote: "Olivia wanted to ask where he'd gone and whether he'd said anything about her on-air confession or the jab she'd taken at him with the \"Survivor\" show, but asking Diane to ask Ben to ask Matt how he felt smacked of high school machinations. The last thing she intended to do was let people know how much Matt's actions, or lack thereof, mattered."
quote: "They walked in silence for a time, and just when she'd decided there was no way she could bring up Matt's name without embarrassing herself, Diane said, \"I know you told me you're not interested in the gory details, but Ben thinks Matt's in Chicago. T.J.'s the only one who's heard from him.\""
quote: "They completed a full circuit of the neighborhood and walked up the hill to stand in front of Olivia's mailbox. Diane bent and wrapped her hands around the backs of her knees in a very impressive stretch. Straightening, she did a few quick air punches and said, \"Well, I really enjoyed our walk. Maybe we could make it a regular thing.\""
quote: "\"Absolutely. You sure you don't want to come in for a cold drink?\" Olivia asked."
quote: "\"Nah. I've got a bottled water in the car, and I want to get my sit-ups in before bed.\""
quote: "Olivia's eyebrows shot up. \"You're really serious this time, aren't you?\""
quote: "Diane nodded and pulled her car keys out of her pocket. \"And I'll tell you something else. Although I personally don't believe he's fit to lick your Nikes, if you think of anything else you don't want to know about Matt, I'll be glad to ask around.\""
quote: "It was a glorious Saturday morning, and she was spending it on a brown vinyl couch in the waiting area of Joe's Garage."
quote: "She eyed the two other patrons and then let her gaze roam around the room to the small corner table with its hours-old pot of coffee and plate of picked-over muffins. She resisted for about fifteen minutes before walking over to scope out the plate, which contained one blueberry muffin and a small mound of crumbs. Idly, she pushed buttons on the wall-mounted TV just above it. Unable to get a picture, she headed back to her seat."
quote: "For a few minutes she used her growling stomach as a diversion so she wouldn't have to think about the twist her life had taken."
quote: "Seducing Dawg had turned out to be an incredibly bad idea. Now she had more memories than she'd intended; memories that popped up at the worst possible moment, like when Kevin took off his shirt at the lake and revealed his scrawny chest, or when she tried to imagine a lifetime of waking up as Mrs. Kevin Middleton—which would require going to bed as her, too. If her regrets were only physical, it might not be so tough. But no matter how many times her head voted for Kevin, her heart cried out for Dawg."
quote: "Looking for another distraction, JoBeth dumped the contents of her purse on the scarred table in front of her and began a serious search for food. She found one cellophane-wrapped breath mint, two smashed M&Ms, and about a pound of accumulated trash, which she spent ten minutes separating into piles before tossing them into the can Joe had so thoughtfully provided."
quote: "She looked up to find both of the other customers watching her. \"I hate waiting around, don't you?\""
quote: "One of them shrugged, and the other shook her head."
quote: "\"Great.\" JoBeth walked over to claim her prize. Her cell phone rang, and she used her free hand to paw through her purse."
quote: "Dawg's cell phone number appeared on the phone's tiny face, and JoBeth froze. She knew if she let herself have so much as a conversation with him, she'd crumble like a potato chip. Knew that if he said he loved her one more time, she'd say she loved him, too, and apologize for starting the whole marriage conversation. And then where would she be?"
quote: "She wanted a partner, a partner who would share the good and the bad, who would be a father to their children and a mate for life. She wanted all kinds of things Dawg Rollins didn't. And that was that."
quote: "All week she'd been careful not to be where he might be, and she was prepared to claim all sorts of phone and technical failures if it ever came down to it. There was no way she could give Kevin a fair shake if she kept thinking about Dawg all the time. She turned the phone off and crammed it back in her purse."
quote: "JoBeth ate the muffin without tasting it, and when she couldn't take hanging around anymore, she stepped out into the work area of the garage. She found Joe bent double over the front of her Cadillac, his head stuck beneath the raised hood."
quote: "\"Almost done. Should be able to have you out of here in just a couple minutes.\""
quote: "\"Good.\" JoBeth took her checkbook out of her purse, opened the driver's door, and leaned in to set her bag on the seat. She heard the hood thunk down into place. When she came back around the car, Joe was wiping his hands on the greasy towel that hung from his belt."
quote: "Joe finished with the towel and looked up in surprise. \"Dawg just called and said he was on his way over to take care of it.\""
quote: "\"No, I'm paying.\" She flipped open her checkbook, her heart starting to race. She needed to be on her way before Dawg arrived. \"How much, Joe?\""
quote: "\"JoBeth, I don't want to get in the middle of anything. The man wants to pay the bill.\""
quote: "\"Joe Larson, this is my car and my responsibility. You tell me how much I owe you right now, or I'm going to call the Better Business Bureau and report you for, for . . . refusing to take my money.\""
quote: "Joe mumbled an amount that had to be too low. Her pen flew as she scribbled out the check, adding another twenty dollars just to show them both who they were screwing with."
quote: "Not waiting for her receipt, she jumped into the Caddy and started her up, noticing even in her hurry that the engine turned right over. Then with a last \"Thanks\" and a wave, she backed out, threw the car into drive, and burned rubber in her haste to escape."
quote: "Two traffic lights later, her pulse had slowed to something resembling normal. Resting her forehead on the steering wheel while she waited for the light to change, she told herself she'd done the right thing."
quote: "Right now, avoiding Dawg Rollins was a matter of self-preservation. Kevin Middleton was a fine man who would make a good husband. He'd already started talking about his vision of the life they could have together, and she suspected he was very close to popping the question. All she had to do was find a way to fall in love with him."
quote: "Dawg Rollins peered through the window at the indoor running track on the YMCA's second floor. It was a fine spring day, but he hadn't wanted to run alone where his thoughts would have nothing to settle on but JoBeth. Here, other runners were already pounding out their miles on the cushioned rubber oval, and because it was open to the workout area below, there were plenty of distractions to help the time pass quickly. Of course, given his knees and his forty-four years, the more forgiving indoor surface was nothing to be sneered at."
quote: "Fitting himself into the flow of runners, he started out easy, regulating his breathing and finding his pace. After the first two miles, he slowed and took an inside lane to get a better view of the activity below."
quote: "StairMasters, treadmills, and exercise bikes lined the mirrored walls. The center of the room had been divided into two sections, with free weights occupying the left side of the great room and strength-training equipment on the right. A Sunday afternoon crowd huffed and sweated its way through a hundred different workouts. Dawg's gaze skimmed over the group, picking out the serious lifters from the weekend warriors, enjoying the sight of the women who belonged in spandex and trying to avoid looking at those who didn't."
quote: "About mile four, he found himself focusing on an elderly couple working their way through a series of machines. The woman moved slowly, as if putting one foot in front of the other required great effort and concentration. One side of her body seemed frozen, and Dawg wondered if she'd had a stroke."
quote: "The man, whom Dawg assumed to be her husband, looked fit and comfortable, but he slowed his pace to match his wife's, and he held both of their towels, a water bottle, and a card for recording workout progress. He didn't look around, but focused all of his attention on the woman beside him."
quote: "When a machine became available, the man would adjust the weights and settings, help the woman carefully onto it, and then talk her through the exercise, penciling in the number of repetitions on the card when she finished. The woman's attention turned to each new machine, while the man's remained riveted on her. Dawg could almost feel his iron will joining and solidifying the woman's, and though he couldn't hear his words, Dawg imagined their loving tone."
quote: "Dawg's heart squeezed as he imposed himself and JoBeth into the scene. Perhaps it would be JoBeth leading him around, helping him grow strong again. Maybe they'd be lucky and never need to draw this deeply on each other's strength."
quote: "Dawg slowed to a walk. He'd been such an incredible fool, it was no wonder she'd been avoiding him lately."
quote: "It was time to stop circling around the issue. He loved JoBeth Namey, and he knew now just how much he wanted to marry her."
quote: "He left the track and went down to the locker room to shower. He needed an engagement ring. Then he needed to find JoBeth and tell her what he'd decided. He could just imagine the joy on her face when he finally popped the question."
quote: "Dawg toweled off, dressed, and walked out through the strength-training area, hoping for one last glimpse of the couple who'd finally made him understand what an oaf he'd been."
quote: "Matt had been in Evanston for more than a week now, and he still wasn't sure what he was doing there. He'd visited Adam's grave, wandered old haunts, and spent time with his nephews, who seemed eerily like he and Adam had been at their age. He told himself he wasn't there for a reason, that he didn't have to put himself under a microscope like some unfortunate bug just because Olivia thought he needed dissecting. And then proceeded to do exactly that."
quote: "He spent even more time thinking about Olivia herself. She popped into his head without warning, and it took a huge amount of effort to shove her out. When he caught himself contemplating how much brighter and more endearing she was than other women he'd known, he knew something was very wrong."
quote: "He gave it his best shot, but nothing he did seemed to cure the emptiness he felt or point him in a direction that made sense. Everything that had mattered most to him— his work, his lifestyle—suddenly seemed unbearably shallow and lacking in some elemental way."
quote: "Even the bedroom of his youth offered no real answers. Floor-to-ceiling shelves still bulged with boyhood treasures. Little League trophies sat next to the airplane models Adam had painstakingly assembled. A complete set of Hardy Boys mysteries leaned against a plexiglass cube that contained a baseball signed by the 1974 Cubs. Everything that had mattered before the age of thirteen was on these shelves."
quote: "Matt had made the transition to teenager alone in this room. But even as the sports posters he and his twin chose together gave way to Matt's budding passion for rock bands and fast cars, Adam had always been there, the missing part of him standing to his right and sharing his life."
quote: "Matt closed his eyes and remembered. He'd lost his virginity at the age of sixteen in the twin bed he now sat on. He'd been nervous as hell, afraid his parents would come home early and catch him and MaryAnn Hightower doing the deed, but sex had been the first thing that knocked Adam out of his brain. He'd been seeking that oblivion ever since."
quote: "A knock sounded on the door, and Matt welcomed the interruption. \"Come in.\""
quote: "\"Hi.\" His sister stood in the threshold. \"Thought you might like to come to the restaurant for lunch today.\""
quote: "\"Love to. Mom said something about a walk down to the lake, but we've talked about doing that every day since I got here, and it still hasn't happened. I'm not counting on it.\""
quote: "Sandra walked over and sat next to him. \"She's never been able to go back there.\""
quote: "\"She's never been able to do a whole lot of things.\""
quote: "\"No. After Daddy died, she finally agreed to try therapy, but she's kept everything bottled up for so long, I don't think she knows where to begin. Sometimes I think Kyle and Kenny will do it for her, but I don't know. She still blames herself.\""
quote: "\"We all do. But she's the mother. It was her responsibility to get hold of herself and give a shit about us.\""
quote: "Sandra smiled an incredibly sad smile. \"I'm a mother now, little brother. And I can promise you she gave a shit. And she still does. She just can't show it the way we want her to.\""
quote: "Matt knew he sounded like a petulant child, but he couldn't stop himself. \"She wasn't the only one who lost someone.\""
quote: "\"No, she wasn't.\" His sister slipped an arm up around his shoulder and squeezed. \"And I don't think any of us ever really understood what it must have been like for you. But we all have our chosen method of coping.\" She placed a hand on his cheek and turned his face toward hers. \"Or hiding.\""
quote: "\"Olivia accused me of that very thing. Called me a Peter Pan and said I refused to grow up.\""
quote: "\"Yeah, I know. I watched the show on the Internet. And I haven't been able to get you to utter her name all week. Obviously my attempts to make you talk have been too subtle.\""
quote: "Matt snorted at the idea of Sandra and the word \"subtle\" sharing the same sentence, and his gaze cut to the laptop he'd set up to monitor WTLK."
quote: "\"Things were heating up between you right before we left for Italy,\" Sandra said. \"But we missed the remote. What happened?\""
quote: "\"Yes, I do. It would be nice to have some inkling why you've been moping around here all week.\""
quote: "His sister just gave him that look she'd been giving him since she turned thirteen and decided girls were inherently superior to boys. \"Well, as far as I'm concerned, she's on the air telling it like it is, while you're . . . ?\""
quote: "Sandra just laughed. \"I love her show. I keep picturing men in minivans trying to survive in suburbia.\""
quote: "Matt winced. It was hard to believe men and women could ever get together with that kind of condescension coming from the other side. He was just as capable of expressing his feelings and coping with everyday life as the next guy."
quote: "Sandra glanced at the clock on the wall and moved toward the computer. Both of their gazes traveled to the screen, and Matt reached over to adjust the volume. A moment later they heard, \"This is Dr. Olivia Moore. You're on the air.\""
quote: "\"So that's what you're doing here,\" his sister said. \"You're hiding from Dr. O.\""
quote: "\"Shhh.\" Matt raised the volume another notch and heard Olivia say, \"I appreciate all the calls and support, but you can stop sending condolence cards. Nobody died. I told Matt Ransom how I felt and he didn't feel the same way. End of story.\""
quote: "His sister shot him another look, but Matt was completely focused on Olivia."
quote: "\"Granted,\" she said, \"most women don't expose themselves quite so publicly. But to my knowledge no one's ever actually died from embarrassment. I'm fine. Let's get on with your problems and issues.\""
quote: "Matt's gaze strayed to the cell phone lying next to the computer, then moved back to the screen."
quote: "Sandra stepped up beside him. \"You'd have to be stupid to pass up a woman like Olivia Moore.\""
quote: "\"Then give her what you can. She's a professional. She should be able to help fix your sorry ass, and she'd probably do it for free.\""
quote: "Sandra picked up the phone, flipped it open, and scrolled through the electronic phone book. When she found the number for WTLK, she hit the send button and handed it back to him. The door clicked shut behind her as Diane Lowe came on the line."
quote: "There was a silence and then, \"Well what do you know, the schmuck calleth.\""
quote: "\"Nice to talk with you, too, Di. Will you let Olivia know I'm on the line?\""
quote: "\"Sorry, but as far as I'm concerned you can talk to Olivia on the air or not at all. You owe her at least that.\""
quote: "\"All right.\" Matt took a deep breath and sat down in front of the computer screen, wondering what in the hell he was going to say to her."
quote: "A few seconds later they were on the air together."
quote: "At the sound of Matt's voice, Olivia's heart began to pound."
quote: "\"Never better,\" she lied, as calmly as she could. \"Where are you calling from?\""
quote: "\"Chicago. All the flights to Never Land were full. And I got voted out of my minivan.\""
quote: "She wiped sweaty palms on her pant leg and ordered herself to calm down. Apparently she wasn't prepared for the reality of confronting Matt on the air."
quote: "\"Glad you've been catching the show. Are you having a good trip?\""
quote: "They sounded like two acquaintances who'd bumped into each other at a cocktail party. If they didn't watch out they'd be talking about . . ."
quote: "\"Fine. It's a little dry, but there's a fifty percent chance of rain over the weekend.\""
quote: "\"So. Are you calling about anything in particular?\" she prompted."
quote: "He paused, and Olivia braced herself, having no idea what was coming next."
quote: "\"I've been meaning to apologize for the fiasco during the remote,\" Matt said. \"I have the greatest possible respect for your, um, professional capabilities. And I'm sorry I was partly responsible for compromising that professionalism.\""
quote: "\"And, uh, I've missed seeing you around. Maybe when I get back we could go out for a drink or something.\""
quote: "\"You're asking me out on a date?\" she asked incredulously."
quote: "\"Matt, I went on the air over a week ago and admitted that I love you. You didn't bother to call. Now you're calling to ask me out on a date? As far as I'm concerned, we're a couple of light-years beyond dating.\""
quote: "She paused, trying to clamp down on her anger and disappointment; this was not the place to air either. \"I don't know what you're doing in Chicago, but it doesn't seem to include getting in touch with reality or yourself. Even you should realize that this would be an ideal time for some self-exploration.\""
quote: "\"Olivia, I'm on a vacation, not a spiritual quest. And in my world one person doesn't just blurt out their feelings and then demand that the other person do the same. Why the hell did you say you love me if you think I need so much work?\""
quote: "His tone had that annoying edge of amusement to it, but Olivia could hear the anger and confusion underneath. At least they had that in common."
quote: "\"Look,\" Matt continued. \"When you're not trying to nail my ass to a wall, I really enjoy your company. We're good with each other. We have great chemistry together. I want to spend time with you. I have . . . feelings for you, but I am not looking to make declarations of undying love.\""
quote: "She could feel tears forming. Tears of anger and frustration, tears for what could be if only she could make him see it."
quote: "She was a professional therapist in love with a man who refused to take so much as a poke at the cotton wool he'd wrapped around his feelings. And he wouldn't let her take a poke, either."
quote: "She scrubbed at her eyes with the back of her hand and blinked back the tears. There was no way she was crying over Matt Ransom. She hadn't allowed it in private; she sure as hell wasn't going to do it in public."
quote: "A glance at the digital clock confirmed she was close to sign-off, so she went ahead and brought her theme music in low."
quote: "\"Oh, no, Olivia. We're not leaving it like this. I came to Chicago for a vacation, not to climb some emotional Everest.\""
quote: "\"That's too bad, Matt, because that's exactly what you need to do. If you won't let me help you, then find someone who can. You're way too wonderful to spend the rest of your life as Atlanta's Bachelor of the Year.\""
quote: "\"And you're totally incapable of accepting people the way they are. I don't think a psychologist's job is supposed to be changing people against their will.\""
quote: "\"Then we have nothing else to talk about. I'm sorry, Matt, but we seem to be out of time.\""
quote: "She brought her music up full, almost drowning him out."
quote: "\"Olivia, I'm warning you. I've got my little black book with me, and I'm not afraid to use it.\""
quote: "\"Knock yourself out, Matt. And then I'll just finish up getting over you. I understand it doesn't take anywhere near as long the second time.\""
quote: "And then with a great deal of unprofessional satisfaction, she dumped the call."
quote: "It took Dawg two days to choose the ring and another day to admit that JoBeth was actively avoiding him. He'd left messages, tried to catch her at work, even carried flowers over to her house, and each time, no JoBeth."
quote: "Last night at bowling he'd tried to pump Emmylou for information, but she'd been stubbornly closemouthed except to let Dawg know that JoBeth seemed to be seriously dating her old boyfriend—the accountant her parents had long ago given their seal of approval to."
quote: "A sense of urgency gnawed at his gut as Dawg climbed into the Jeep and drove to the Magnolia Diner. Enough was enough. Tonight he intended to get engaged—even if he had to browbeat a little gray-haired waitress to do it."
quote: "Noreen didn't look too happy when Dawg slid into the only empty table in her section. In fact, she looked downright ornery."
quote: "\"I need to know where JoBeth is. I want to talk to her.\""
quote: "\"With Middleton?\" He shook his head. \"I'm not buyin' it. It's me she loves.\""
quote: "\"You know, sometimes that just isn't enough. She deserves a future and a family, and Middleton wants to give her both.\""
quote: "\"She has told you that, Dawg. More than once. You just haven't been listening.\""
quote: "The waitress folded her arms across her chest and stared stonily at him."
quote: "Dawg reached in his pocket and pulled out the small black velvet box. \"You aren't the first person I was planning to show this to, you know.\""
quote: "Noreen's face thawed considerably. She lifted the box in her hand and held it up to the light, admiring the sparkle of the diamond. \"That must be a whole carat.\""
quote: "\"Well, it's not cubic zirconia, I can promise you that.\""
quote: "\"It's right nice, Dawg. But I'm afraid you're a bit late.\""
quote: "Dawg snatched the box back and snapped it closed. \"What do you mean?\""
quote: "\"JoBeth bought herself a fancy new dress for her dinner with Kevin tonight. If I don't miss my guess, she's expecting him to propose.\""
quote: "Dawg slid out of the booth and stood, towering over the waitress. \"Where are they, Noreen?\""
quote: "\"Noreen, I'm going to give you exactly one chance to tell me where they are, and then I'm going to pick you up and sling you over my shoulder and carry you out of this place. If you don't tell me where they are, I'll make you show me.\""
quote: "Noreen giggled like a teenager. \"It does my heart good to see you finally realizing what you've had all this time. They're at La Parisienne. I just hope you're not too late. Their reservation was for seven.\""
quote: "Twenty minutes and a twenty-dollar bill later, he was knotting the loaner tie around his neck and squeezing into a dinner jacket made for a much smaller man. The maitre d' led him to a small linen-covered table in a secluded alcove, where Kevin Middleton sat alone."
quote: "\" 'Lo, Rollins. Guess I shouldn't be surprised to see you here.\""
quote: "\"You've been on every date we've had. Been a silent partner in every conversation. Might as well be here tonight.\""
quote: "\"Ladies' room, I think. Asked her to marry me, and she started crying. Said she had to go to the bathroom.\""
quote: "\"Don't know. Couldn't understand a word she was saying. She was blubbering all over herself.\""
quote: "Heartened by Middleton's confusion, Dawg got directions to the ladies' room. After a warning knock, he opened the door and went inside."
quote: "JoBeth sat on a fancy sofa sobbing into a wet hanky. When she looked up and saw him, she cried harder."
quote: "\"Wh-wh-what are you doing here?\" she sobbed. \"Don't want to talk to you.\""
quote: "\"Now, sweetheart.\" He plucked a big wad of tissues out of a gold-plated holder on the counter and went to sit next to her on the couch. \"Why don't you tell me what happened?\""
quote: "Her face crumpled, and a line of black gooey stuff streaked down one cheek as she cried. \"K-K-Kevin asked me to marry him.\" She wailed even harder, as if her heart were broken. \"Supposed to be the happiest day of my life. Wahhhhhhh.\""
quote: "He put an arm around her shoulder and drew her up against his chest. \"Hush, sweetheart. It's okay.\""
quote: "She sobbed until his shirt grew damp from her tears. Not knowing what else to do, he patted her on the back and rocked her like a baby. \"Everything's okay, JoBeth.\""
quote: "\"I wanted to fall in love with him. I tried so hard.\""
quote: "Her sobs lessened. She hiccupped, and he handed her another wad of tissue, taking the used ones and shoving them in the jacket pocket."
quote: "\"But I already love you.\" She looked up at him, the tears rolling down her cheeks and carrying the last of her makeup with them. \"I can't help it.\""
quote: "\"I know, JoBeth. Me too.\" He used the pad of one thumb to wipe the tear tracks off her face. And then he bent down and kissed her."
quote: "\"I'd rather just be with you than marry anyone else,\" she whispered."
quote: "Even tear-stained and without makeup, she was the most beautiful woman Dawg had ever seen. He wanted to make babies with her and grow old by her side. He'd buy her a gym membership, so she could help him around the equipment when he was old and doddering."
quote: "\"But I want you to be married,\" he whispered back."
quote: "JoBeth sat up and sniffed. She looked at him in confusion. \"You do?\""
quote: "Matt Ransom took out his little black book, the leather one with years of good times in it and a coded rating system so Machiavellian it had never been broken. Other guys had gone to Palm Pilots when the technology had presented itself, but Matt liked to see the possibilities right there in black and white."
quote: "He'd given Olivia fair warning. He didn't want to spill his guts, examine his motivations, or try to understand his family's dynamics. He just wanted to be himself again. And that meant going out and having some uncomplicated fun with women who weren't looking for more than he wanted to give."
quote: "He flipped through the book's gilt-edged pages and smiled over the memories they evoked. There were the Barrett twins, who'd insisted on doing everything together, including him. And Cindy Culpepper, who might have become a nun if he hadn't helped her discover how important it was to experience lust before confessing it."
quote: "In this book resided the phone numbers of all the women he had known, and while many of them were just pleasant memories at this point, others made ongoing guest appearances in his life."
quote: "Olivia Moore's was the only number he'd ripped out of the book and never intended to call again, the only woman he'd been unable to deal with on such a casual basis. She was too serious, too earnest in her beliefs, too determined to make him think and feel things he didn't want to think or feel."
quote: "He should have paid closer attention to how things had turned out eight years ago. At some point one had to learn from one's mistakes."
quote: "He flipped past Darlene Draper and Carly Feinway and stopped at MaryAnn Hightower, now a well-known television news anchor in Chicago. Olivia wanted him to explore his past? Fine, that's exactly what he'd do. And he'd make damned sure she knew how much effort he was putting into it."
quote: "Olivia entered the control room and found Di hunched over a morning newspaper. Her producer's shoulders stiffened, and she folded the paper and stuffed it into her handbag before turning around to acknowledge Olivia."
quote: "\"Did you wrap something in that paper?\" Olivia sniffed suspiciously. \"Do I need to do a McMuffin search?\""
quote: "\"I'm clean, boss. Really. No back-sliding for me.\" Diane pushed her purse under the control board with her foot, never breaking eye contact."
quote: "That could mean only one thing. Olivia waggled her fingers at her producer. \"Come on, give it up. Who'd he go out with this time?\" Her tone was carefully nonchalant, but her stomach was clenched against the blow."
quote: "Diane pulled the paper out of her purse and passed it over."
quote: "Olivia could hardly believe how much it hurt. Every headline, every picture that she shrugged off in public tore its own little piece of flesh. She'd taken so many direct hits that if she were a submarine, she'd be lying at the bottom of the ocean right now. And the more she shrugged off Matt's actions, the more frenzied his social life became—not exactly a healthy scenario for any of the parties involved."
quote: "\"How many tall, beautiful, professional women do you think there are in Chicago, Olivia?\""
quote: "\"I don't know,\" Olivia responded. \"Millions—and it looks like Matt intends to date them all.\""
quote: "She kept her tone flip, because admitting to the hurt would only make her an object of pity. But the time had come to end the psychological dance she and Matt had been doing."
quote: "As much as she wanted to believe Matt could deal with his baggage and come out the other side, her experience, both professional and personal, told her just how wishful that kind of thinking was. The time had come for her to cut Matt loose—not just on the outside, but deep down inside where he'd taken hold and wouldn't let go."
quote: "Gianelli's was mobbed. Customers stood three deep at the bar and elbow to elbow in the entrance. Those unlucky enough to be without reservations did their waiting out on the sidewalk."
quote: "Matt let the maitre d' escort his date to their booth while he went in search of his sister. He found her busing a just-vacated table."
quote: "\"Wow. I've never seen it like this. What happened?\""
quote: "\"You did.\" Sandra shouted to be heard above the crowd. \"Toss me a dishcloth, will you?\""
quote: "Matt did as she asked, squeezing by a rowdy party of six to reach the other side of the table she was turning."
quote: "\"You're right. And because I'm so grateful, I'm going to give you some free advice.\""
quote: "\"Cut out the shit, Matt. You're going too far and you're taking too long. If you keep waving women under her nose, the good doctor is going to write you off.\""
quote: "He broke eye contact with his sister to watch his date accept the glass of wine he'd had sent to their table. Like the others, she was beautiful and entertaining. She didn't have Olivia's keen intelligence, or her sincerity, and she didn't listen with the same kind of intensity, but then, who did?"
quote: "She accepted him at face value and had no interest in turning him inside out and forcing him to grow as a human being. Being with her and the others was easy, restful . . . and surprisingly shallow and unsatisfying."
quote: "Matt frowned. \"You don't really think Olivia has any interest in hearing from me at this point, do you?\" he asked."
quote: "She shook her head in disgust. \"Thanks for the free publicity, little brother, but I don't really want to be a part of this. If you can't see what you're throwing away, you're not smart enough to be a Ransom.\""
quote: "She gave a small nod toward the willowy redhead waiting for him on the other side of the room."
quote: "\"Dr. O is right, you know. It's time for you to grow up. And way past time for you to stop playing with dolls.\""
quote: "Matt lifted his beer and drained it in one long gulp. It was 2 A.M. and he, Jonathan, and D.J. were firmly ensconced at their favorite table at Nick's. They'd shot pool with some of the old gang and consumed more than their fair share of alcohol. Only a handful of other tables were still occupied. It was time to start thinking about calling it a night."
quote: "\"Are you okay, man?\" Jon was one of Matt's oldest friends. He and his younger brother, D.J., had been Matt's carousing partners long before they'd been legally eligible to carouse. They were guys' guys, great to run with and no more anxious to settle down than he was."
quote: "\"I don't think you're as fine as you think you are.\" D.J.'s voice rasped from too many hours in a smoke-filled room."
quote: "\"Why's that?\" Matt's eyes felt like D.J.'s voice sounded."
quote: "His head hurt, and something Dawg Rollins had said on the air about being bushwhacked by love kept teasing at his brain."
quote: "\"Because you sent that redhead home in a cab at eleven o'clock. Eleven! And for the last two hours you've been totally ignoring the blonde over there.\""
quote: "Jonathan shook his head sadly. \"There is something wrong in the world when Matt Ransom doesn't give a good-looking blonde a second glance.\""
quote: "Matt sat up and studied his friend. \"You don't think I need to grow up and stop running around with women?\""
quote: "D.J. motioned for another beer. \"Hell, no. Why, that would be like Sammy Sosa refusing to hit another homer, or Tiger Woods giving up golf! It would disturb the natural order of things. What's got into you, anyway?\""
quote: "Matt ran a hand through his hair and turned to look at the blonde. She was exceptionally well put together, and when she noticed him looking she shot him a silent invitation no man could mistake."
quote: "He cocked his head, gave her a slow once-over, and watched her run her tongue seductively across her lips."
quote: "Still nothing. He knew exactly who and what had gotten into him, and he didn't like it one bit. He considered getting up and taking the blonde up on her offer just to prove a point, but he was getting kind of tired of making the same point over and over."
quote: "He looked at the woman once more. Then he looked at his friends. Without intending to, he'd already taken a long hard look at himself. And he couldn't say he was too impressed with what he'd seen."
quote: "The following day Matt sat on a bench and watched the late afternoon sun glint on the lake. He tore the remnants of a hot dog bun into bits and tossed them to the ducks. A green mallard honked loudly before gobbling up the offering, his webbed feet paddling vigorously as he positioned himself in front of the others."
quote: "The boulder that had claimed his brother's life looked like nothing more than a random geological formation— just a big rock, not something that could change the course of a family's life."
quote: "He let his mind roam freely back to the summer days when he and Adam had raced around this lake with their friends and cooled off in its depths. Like he had every day for the past twenty-three years, Matt wished his brother were there to talk to. He also wished he hadn't argued with Sandra the night before, and that it wasn't time to go home and face Olivia. But wishing didn't make it so."
quote: "He heard soft footsteps on the grass behind him and looked up to see his mother approaching. Surprised, he moved over to make room for her, and for a time they both stared out across the lake, each lost in thought."
quote: "The bossy mallard honked loudly, and the rest of the flock fell into a loose V-formation behind him. They paddled toward the opposite shore as his mother began to speak."
quote: "Matt's gaze left the ducks to settle on his mother's face. The old pain was still etched clearly across it, and the lines that radiated from the corners of her eyes reflected years of looking inward. Or trying not to."
quote: "\"I never meant to shut you and Sandra out. I never meant to do that.\""
quote: "She turned away from the rock to face him . . . and, finally, their past. \"Yes, I do. When Adam died, I was so stunned by the emptiness that I couldn't reach out. I couldn't make myself do what I knew needed to be done.\""
quote: "Her voice broke, and Matt waited silently for her to continue."
quote: "\"When you and Sandra found the strength I couldn't, I was so ashamed. I knew you were hurting, I knew you needed me, but I just kept falling into that hole that Adam left.\""
quote: "He took his mother's hand in his and gave it a squeeze, knowing all too well the emptiness she described."
quote: "\"Sandra's found her own way,\" his mother said. \"She's got Dan and the boys and the restaurant. But I worry about you. You spend all your time sidestepping that hole, when what you really need to do is fill it in.\""
quote: "Matt smiled at the mental image. \"So you're saying I need some emotional fill dirt?\" Today's conversation with his mother would go a ways toward filling in the bottom layer of that hole; Olivia could probably dump in a whole truckload, if only he would let her."
quote: "He let himself really think about Olivia then. He thought about her sense of moral rightness, her desire to help others, and her determination to fight for what she believed in. She saw right through him and insisted on loving him anyway. Though he had no idea what she thought he had to offer in return, she seemed very certain he was worth having."
quote: "Wouldn't it be a pisser if she was right?"
quote: "Across the lake the ducks changed formation, the mallard once again taking the lead. When they reached Adam's rock, they waddled ashore and shook themselves off in the fading light. A breeze ruffled their feathers and skimmed across the water to tease the branches of a nearby elm. There were good memories in this place, too, and a sense of comfort as well. With a new sense of purpose, Matt took his mother's arm and helped her up from the bench."
quote: "\"Sandra said she thought you'd be heading home soon.\""
quote: "\"Yeah,\" Matt said. \"I have an appointment with my agent tomorrow morning, and then I'm going to drive back to Atlanta. I've got some loose ends to tie up.\""
quote: "Matt's agent, Brad Hanford, pushed his half-eaten omelette aside and sat back in his chair. \"Let me see if I've got this straight. You want me to tell Syntex Communications—the biggest syndicator of radio programming in the universe—that you are willing to consider their proposal for an opinion show with Olivia Moore. But you want them to lock her into the deal before you'll commit.\""
quote: "\"Well, it does sound a little . . . unusual, but I have my reasons.\""
quote: "\"Yes, I believe they're called fear and cowardice. The woman has already admitted she loves you, Matt. All you have to do is grovel a little. Men do it all the time. It isn't all that painful.\""
quote: "\"But that's the beauty of it, Brad. I won't have to. Syntex is salivating to get us. It's their idea, let them do the courting. Olivia gets national syndication . . . and me. Everybody wins. We'll be working together and everything else will fall into place.\""
quote: "Brad shook his head. \"You are one pathetic son of a bitch. Do you want me to keep talking to TLK?\""
quote: "Matt shrugged. \"It can't hurt to have a fallback, but there's no way they can match Syntex's offer.\""
quote: "Hanford picked up the check and gave Matt one last look. \"You seem pretty sure of yourself. What if Dr. Moore's not interested? She told the world she loved you over three weeks ago, and you've been on a dating rampage ever since.\""
quote: "Matt shifted uncomfortably in his seat. He had screwed up the whole communication thing pretty royally, but if there was one thing he figured he could count on, it was Olivia's ambition."
quote: "As much as she'd hated the idea of the food bank remote, she'd gone along to protect her career. She might want to chew him up one end and down the other, but there was no way the Olivia he knew was going to turn down the offer of a lifetime."
quote: "Work with Matt Ransom? I'd rather slide down a sharp razor and land in alcohol!\" The faces regarding her from around the conference table registered shock and disbelief, which, Olivia suspected, made them mirror images of her own."
quote: "Unsure what to do next, she stood up and gathered her things. Her agent, Karen Crandall, stood more slowly, telegraphing her reluctance with every tortoiselike movement."
quote: "\"Olivia,\" she said, \"why don't we sit down and hear what they have to—\""
quote: "\"No, I'm sorry. I'd love to be a part of Syntex Communications, and a male/female counterpoint show is very tempting, but I can't do it with Matt. How do you argue thoughts and feelings with a man who won't admit he has any?\""
quote: "Olivia looked Edward Simms straight in the eye. She opened her mouth, closed it, opened it again. She wasn't sure she had the strength to turn him down again."
quote: "She'd known then that being in that kind of proximity and under that kind of pressure with Matt was an emotional disaster waiting to happen, but she had ignored her survival instincts because of her need to be the last talk show host still standing. Once again she was being forced to choose between emotional health and professional success. As she'd told her listeners over and over, a person was nothing more than the sum of her choices."
quote: "She nodded to Simms and his VPs. \"Thank you very much for the offer. I'm flattered.\" She smiled. \"And very tempted. But razor blades notwithstanding, I'm afraid I have to decline.\""
quote: "And then she was riding the elevator down twenty-two floors with her stunned agent beside her. Karen, who talked like others breathed, held her tongue until they exited through the revolving door onto Fifth Avenue."
quote: "Her feet pounded on the pavement as Olivia stared unseeing into the shop windows they passed. She had just turned down the biggest offer of her career, said no to the thing she wanted most. No to becoming a household name, no to reaching the pinnacle of syndication. No to more money than she'd thought to see in a lifetime."
quote: "Olivia stopped in front of a display of Coach handbags as she examined the question more closely. She'd said no because she couldn't keep sacrificing her emotions in order to advance her career; because the quality of her life was more important than what she achieved professionally. Tired and out of time, she slid into the back of the limo beside Karen for the ride to JFK."
quote: "If she forced herself to work with Matt, given everything that was unresolved between them, what did that say about her? That she had learned nothing; that she would always subjugate and deny her feelings in order to succeed."
quote: "Life was too short to torture herself that way. And much too short to be manipulated. Taking her seat in the first-class cabin for the flight to Atlanta, Olivia realized how \"off\" the whole thing felt. If Matt Ransom was such an important part of the Syntex equation, where was he?"
quote: "She sipped from the glass of wine the flight attendant pressed on her and thought about that for a while."
quote: "If the Bachelor of the Year wanted to do a show with her, he was going to have to tell her so himself. And he was going to have to tell her why."
quote: "Sometimes those creases came in unexpected forms, like Melissa's husband, who had evidently been faking an interest in power tools."
quote: "\"I just don't get it, Dr. O,\" a throaty-voiced Melissa said. \"Every year since we got married, I've given my husband a power tool for his birthday.\""
quote: "\"And the other day, while we were cleaning out the garage, he told me he'd rather have lingerie.\" Melissa's voice warbled. \"From Victoria's Secret.\""
quote: "\"How would you feel? He used to rip my panties off at every opportunity. I didn't realize he was checking for a style number.\""
quote: "Olivia bit back a smile. She could hear the shock and confusion in Melissa's voice, but she detected no revulsion, which meant Melissa might be able to come to terms with her husband's predilection."
quote: "\"Cross-dressers are almost always heterosexual,\" Olivia said. \"If you love him, and you can live with the lingerie, it doesn't have to be a problem.\""
quote: "\"But he's six feet two. His friends call him Bubba,\" Melissa pointed out. \"And I already bought the table saw.\""
quote: "\"You won't believe it, Dr. O. I'm getting married.\""
quote: "The rush of envy was completely personal and totally unprofessional. Olivia quashed it immediately. \"Congratulations,\" she said. \"That's fabulous.\""
quote: "\"Thanks. I still can't believe it. Two men proposed to me in one night. It was the most incredible thing.\""
quote: "\"Wow. Two proposals,\" Olivia marveled, unable to ignore the irony. The person she'd advised had received two marriage proposals, while the man she loved had put a monkey wrench in her career plans and was too busy dating to admit to any feelings at all."
quote: "\"Yes,\" JoBeth gushed. \"It was so romantic. He came right into the ladies' room of La Parisienne to ask me. We're going to get married in the fall.\""
quote: "\"Anyway, I just wanted to say thanks. If it weren't for you and Matt, this never would have happened.\""
quote: "Olivia couldn't bring herself to ask whether it was because of them or in spite of them. \"Congratulations, JoBeth. Really. It's great that things worked out.\""
quote: "She was just trying to imagine Matt Ransom on his knees anywhere, let alone in a ladies' lounge, when she heard a strange noise in the control room. Olivia squinted up through the glass, but Diane had turned her back. There was some sort of altercation going on, but when no security guard appeared, Olivia shifted her attention back to her caller."
quote: "\"Is Matt going to be back soon?\" JoBeth asked. \"Dawg's on a run out of state today, but he asked me to be sure to thank him, too.\""
quote: "Olivia heard raised voices on the other side of the plate glass. Craning her neck, she tried to see around Diane, but equipment blocked her view. \"You know, I'm not really sure when he'll be back. In fact . . .\""
quote: "Her producer turned around, and a moment later, Matt Ransom's head poked up above Diane's. While Olivia watched, he put his hands on Diane's shoulders and moved her firmly out of the way. The next voice she heard in her headphones was Matt's."
quote: "\"Actually, JoBeth,\" he said, as if he hadn't just arm-wrestled Diane for his spot in front of the control-room microphone, \"I am back, and I'm glad to hear things worked out so well for you and Dawg.\""
quote: "Diane popped her head out from behind Matt's shoulder and mouthed a silent apology, but Olivia was still trying to grasp what was going on."
quote: "\"You were right to be pissed off at me the last time we spoke. I had no business giving Dawg advice when I was screwing up my own life so badly.\""
quote: "There was a stunned silence as Olivia, JoBeth, and, Olivia was certain, every one of her listeners, shook their heads trying to unclog their ears."
quote: "\"Gee, Matt,\" JoBeth observed. \"You sure don't sound like your usual self.\""
quote: "\"No, I don't, do I?\" Matt replied. \"I think we know who we can blame for that.\" He looked directly at Olivia, but it was impossible to read his thoughts through the glass."
quote: "Olivia imagined the whole station straining toward the nearest set of speakers. Somewhere in the bowels of the building Charles Crankower was undoubtedly jumping for joy. She didn't know why she was so surprised that Matt had shown up unannounced. Matt Ransom had always conducted his life by the seat of his pants. Too bad he filled them out so nicely."
quote: "\"So, what brings you back to Atlanta?\" She kept both her expression and her voice neutral, while she combated the glimmer of hope that stirred with a mental listing of Matt's many transgressions, including, but not limited to, compelling her to turn down her shot at national syndication."
quote: "\"Well, I considered pretending I just happened to be passing by, but I came directly from Chicago, so that's a bit of a stretch.\""
quote: "\"And then I considered pretending I was a volunteer member of the relaxation police sent to evaluate your progress,\" he said."
quote: "Olivia braced for the expected punch line, but he surprised her. \"But I'm getting real tired of pretending.\""
quote: "He sounded so unhappy about his admission that Olivia decided to test him with one of her own."
quote: "\"I made the mistake of falling in love with you twice, Matt,\" she said. \"And then I felt the need to admit it to the world.\" She paused. \"Only you didn't want to hear it.\""
quote: "\"No, I didn't,\" he said. \"I've been trying real hard not to listen to a lot of things.\""
quote: "Once again, Matt sounded less than happy about the revelation, but nonetheless, he'd made it. Three weeks ago this conversation would have sent him running for the emotional hills."
quote: "Matt stepped away from the plate glass. Olivia and her audience waited, collective breath held, while he left the control room and let himself into the studio. There he pushed her microphone up on its boom arm and leaned against the table where she sat, facing her."
quote: "Olivia looked up into Matt's eyes. There was something in them that hadn't been there before—a squeaky new grown-up thing that looked like it felt about as comfortable as a brand-new pair of high heels. But there was humor in them, too, and a willingness, she thought, to see this through. Her hope grew and began to multiply."
quote: "\"Look, there's no way I'm getting down on one knee or anything, but I do have feelings for you. Real . . . feelings. With . . . depth behind them.\""
quote: "\"Gee, Dr. O,\" chirped JoBeth. \"He's starting to sound like a real live grown-up. Are you sure that's Matt Ransom in there?\""
quote: "\"It's not Memorex,\" growled Matt as he leaned over and dumped the call."
quote: "Olivia just nodded her head and reminded herself to breathe."
quote: "Matt cleared his throat. \"I've been running from my emotions since my brother died, Olivia. I didn't want to feel that deeply about anyone again. But I feel that way about you.\""
quote: "The words were simply put, and they pierced her to the core. She thought about what it had taken for Matt to mention his brother so publicly and realized just how great a hurdle he'd just jumped."
quote: "\"Thank you,\" she said softly. \"That means a lot to me. But I'm not sure where that leaves us.\""
quote: "\"You're the mental health professional. Isn't there a handbook you can look this stuff up in?\""
quote: "Olivia smiled. \"Well, some sort of demonstration of your feelings would be helpful.\""
quote: "Matt looked nonplussed for a moment. Then he reached into his back pocket and pulled out a little black book, presumably the one he'd threatened her with and put to such constant use in Chicago."
quote: "Barely flinching, he opened it and started ripping out the gilt-edged pages. He ripped them out two and then three at a time, littering the floor around them until all that was left was the leather binding, which he dropped in a nearby trash can."
quote: "\"That's . . . good.\" Olivia found herself nodding her head, unsure how to continue, confounded by the utter Matt-ness of the demonstration."
quote: "Then he smiled, a sudden brightening that sent that damned dimple slicing through his cheek, and she couldn't help smiling back."
quote: "\"It's the least I could do,\" he said. \"I mean, now that your reputation is completely blown, I may as well let go of mine.\""
quote: "He bent down then and kissed her, lightly. \"I don't have a lot of experience with real relationships, Livvy. But if you're willing to walk me through it, I'm willing to give it a try.\""
quote: "As declarations of love went, it was somewhat lacking in hearts and flowers, but Olivia knew a breakthrough when she heard one. Happiness, love, and, okay, it was definitely relief, flooded through her."
quote: "The sound of throat-clearing came from the control room and was followed by a tapping on the glass. Registering the silence in her headphones for the first time, Olivia opened one eye to peek over Matt's shoulder."
quote: "Diane stood in front of the audio board with a finger poised above it. While Olivia watched, her producer leaned forward and pushed a button on the console."
quote: "Smooching sound effects of the overdone cartoon variety went on the air and filled Olivia's headphones."
quote: "Before Olivia could blink, Diane leaned over the board again. A heartbeat later, the opening strains of the \"Hallelujah Chorus\" drowned out the cartoon kisses."
quote: "Still liplocked, but with both eyes wide open now, Olivia watched Diane adjust audio levels. Several long seconds of cartoon kisses and fervent hallelujahs followed."
quote: "When she was certain her microphone was off, Olivia removed her headphones and turned her full attention to Matt, who was still lounging casually against the table. Raising an expectant eyebrow, she waited for him to speak."
quote: "\"So, are you ready to talk about moving to New York and arguing with each other for a living?\" he asked."
quote: "\"I still can't believe they want to pay me that much money just to disagree with you.\""
quote: "Matt smiled; they both seemed to be doing a ridiculous amount of that at the moment. \"I knew that would be a major selling point,\" he said."
quote: "She cocked her head to one side and studied the face of the man beside her. \"Yeah, but there's just one thing. What if we go ahead with this and one day we wake up and we're in such accord we can't think of anything to argue about?\""
quote: "They looked into each other's eyes, looked away, and looked back again, their faces tight with barely suppressed laughter."
quote: "\"You know,\" he said as he slung an arm around her shoulder and pulled her close. \"I think we can start worrying about that right about the time world peace is declared.\" He brought his lips down to brush against hers."
quote: "Miranda Smith was looking for a stamp when she discovered just how good her husband looked in ladies' lingerie."
quote: "It was six-thirty P.M. on the coldest January 8th on record, and the Truro post office was already closed. But for Miranda—who was now conducting a room-by-room search—the stamp was no longer just postage but a symbol of every New Year's resolution she'd ever made. And failed to keep."
quote: "One week into the new year she'd already given up on becoming a better daughter and reading her way through the classics. She wasn't going to wimp out on the only resolution she still had a chance of keeping."
quote: "Somewhere in this five-bedroom, four-bath, six-thousand-square-foot home—which she'd just tossed like a petty thief looking for loot—there had to be enough postage to get her credit card payment in on time."
quote: "Miranda stood in the foyer outside Tom's study debating her next move."
quote: "With less than twenty minutes to get ready for Friday night dinner at her parents', she should be heading upstairs to shower and change, not preparing to strip-search another room."
quote: "It was just a stamp, she told herself as she turned toward the stairs, not the Holy Grail. Paying an occasional late fee was not cause for shame."
quote: "Placing a hand on the banister, she took the first step and consoled herself with the fact that Tom's study had exceedingly low stamp potential, since she paid the household bills and he conducted all of his correspondence from the office."
quote: "On the next step, she decided that next year's resolutions would include buying stamps regularly, which would definitely enhance her chances of eliminating late fees in the future."
quote: "The thought stopped her in midstep, turned her around, and propelled her back down the stairs determined to find a stamp or die trying."
quote: "Miranda marched through the foyer and into the study, where she snapped on the overhead light and crossed to Tom's desk. Finding the desk drawer slightly ajar, she pulled on the knob, gritting her teeth in frustration when the drawer didn't budge."
quote: "Beyond impatience, Miranda wrapped both hands around the knob and yanked with all her might. The drawer sprang free and sent a packet of photos, which must have been holding up the works, spilling across the floor."
quote: "Still in single-minded pursuit of a stamp, Miranda crouched down to gather them up. She duckwalked across the floor, cramming the photos back into their envelope, muttering to herself and trying to figure out where else she could possibly find postage in the next thirty seconds."
quote: "Until she actually looked at the photo in her hand, the one of her husband, the former linebacker, in a red satin bustier and matching bikini panties."
quote: "Miranda's brain froze. Then it raced, sputtered, and ceased functioning altogether. Unable to think or move, she crouched on the study floor, staring at the picture clutched in her hand."
quote: "Her first clear thought was that there had to be some mistake. As president of Ballantyne Bras, her family's bra and lingerie business, her husband was expected to supervise the design and production of a comprehensive line of women's undergarments."
quote: "And yet here he was in a black lace teddy. And a fuchsia merry widow—with some woman's hand on his rear end."
quote: "Miranda squinted at the hand, hoping to recognize it, but except for its French manicure and obvious familiarity with her husband's derriere, it could have belonged to anyone."
quote: "The next photo revealed Tom in a cream-colored thong that looked as if it had been custom-made for him. Her head began to pound as she realized that it probably had."
quote: "Unable to tear her gaze from the sight of Tom's rugged torso sheathed in such feminine trappings, Miranda gathered up the rest of the photos and pulled herself up into the chair."
quote: "She thought of all the times she'd seen her husband smile and wink and say \"Hi, I'm Tom Smith, and I'm in ladies' underwear,\" and never imagined he was telling the truth."
quote: "Or that he looked as good in lingerie as she did."
quote: "Drawing in one shaky breath and letting out another, she dragged her gaze from the photos to stare out the study window. Porch lights twinkled from the house across the cul-de-sac, and snow glistened in the arc of a streetlamp. It clung to the rain-slicked branches of the oak out front and coated the shiny layer of ice in the next-door neighbor's birdbath, though it was hard to fully appreciate the winter landscape with her brain occupied by the vision of Tom decked out in Ballantyne's biggest sellers."
quote: "In this town, where her family's business had been the largest employer for more than a hundred years, someone should have known . . . and blabbed. And yet until a moment ago, she would have sworn her husband's interest in ladies' underwear was limited to manufacuring it."
quote: "The images ricocheted through her brain, bouncing off each other, raising more questions she couldn't answer."
quote: "Who had taken the pictures? Who did the female hand belong to? And how could a man who'd spent much of his waking life in a jockstrap and cleats look so good in a pale pink corset with tiny rosebuds down the front?"
quote: "Miranda laid the pictures out on the desk. This was her husband. The man she'd met her first miraculous year at Emory University. The man her family had deemed perfect for her . . . and whom she'd married twelve years ago in the biggest wedding Truro had ever seen. The man with whom she'd been trying to have children for eight of those twelve years. The man who'd turned out to be somewhat . . . less . . . than she'd expected, but with whom she'd fully intended to grow old."
quote: "Icy tendrils of fear and dread wrapped themselves around her as she realized that no matter what happened next, her life would never be the same. If her husband wasn't who she thought he was, then who did that make her?"
quote: "She fanned the photos out the way a card player might, forcing herself to look at them one more time. Lifting the last one to the light, she studied the disembodied woman's hand—with its flawless French manicure— resting so possessively on her husband's bare buttock, and a hot flash of anger melted some of the ice."
quote: "Another woman had fondled her husband's naked buns while he was dressed in women's lingerie."
quote: "Her stomach clenched, and she asked herself again how this could have happened. It was normal for married people to fall into their individual routines, normal for the excitement to dissipate after so many years together. It was not normal to miss something as big as this."
quote: "Had there been a \"Gee, honey, I hope you don't mind but I really get off on dressing up in women's underclothes—which is really convenient, since I run your family's brassiere and lingerie business—and I especially like to do this with other women's hands on my butt\"?"
quote: "Had she smiled over the morning paper and her to-do list for the Ladies Guild and said, \"That's nice, Tom. Can you pass the preserves?\""
quote: "She sat, still numb, staring out the window, trying to see . . . something. Trying to imagine what in the world she was supposed to do now."
quote: "When she finally looked at the clock, it was eight P.M. and she and Tom were late for dinner. For a few long moments she tried to imagine where Tom might be—out being fitted for a new bra? Busy baring his butt to the woman with the long nails? Winking and telling people he was in ladies' underwear?"
quote: "She dropped her head into her hands. There was no way she could face him right now—whatever he might be wearing—nor could she imagine what she would say to him when she did."
quote: "For a wild, wonderful moment she contemplated pretending she'd never found the pictures. Even with the grapevine in working order, the wife was usually the last to know. What if she just pretended she didn't?"
quote: "She peered at the photos more closely but couldn't find a date. Maybe Tom didn't even dress up like this anymore. Maybe it had grown old for him, like the whitewater rafting and the iron-man triathlons. Who knew how long those pictures had been stuck in that drawer?"
quote: "Experimentally, she picked up the photos and dropped them into the trash can. Then she turned her back on the trash can and leaned against the desk with studied nonchalance. Okay, so her husband liked to dress up in women's underwear. And he'd never mentioned this to her. And he did it with other women. Okay. Things could be worse. Things could always be worse."
quote: "Miranda bent over to retrieve the packet of photos, which now had strips of shredded paper clinging to it. She knew without thinking what her mother would say. \"Make him give up Miss Manicure, Miranda. And do your best to forgive and forget.\""
quote: "Sure. Then they could get matching underwear made—they owned the company, after all—and . . . and . . . well, she wasn't sure exactly what you did once you were dressed up that way with your husband, but maybe it would be fun. Just because she didn't dress up didn't mean she didn't have an adventurous spirit."
quote: "Maybe her mother had a point. Maybe she could just show Tom the pictures and ask him to explain why he liked to do that. And why he'd never mentioned it. And who the hell the woman with the manicure was."
quote: "Miranda set the packet of photos in front of her. Idly, as she tried to follow that scenario through to its logical conclusion, she peeled the strips of shredded paper off the packet and began to shuffle them around the desktop. Words began to leap out at her. Words that pushed the images she'd just confronted right out of her mind. Words like \"Ballantyne,\" and \"receivables,\" and the truly alarming, \"auditors to investigate.\""
quote: "With trembling fingers, Miranda retrieved more shredded pieces from the trash can and began to fit them together like pieces of a puzzle. They all appeared to be part of a letter from Ballantyne's primary lender, and though there were some gaps, the end result was every bit as life-smashing as the photos."
quote: "Not only did her husband like to dress up in women's underwear with other women helping, he had put Ballantyne—the company that had been passed down by the women in her family for generations—in a precarious position with its bank."
quote: "She couldn't seem to get any air into her lungs, and despite the snow outside, little beads of sweat popped out on her forehead."
quote: "The phone on the desk in front of her rang and she jumped. Heart racing, she brought the receiver up to her ear."
quote: "\"Miranda, the pot roast is starting to resemble shoe leather. Your father and I were expecting you at seven-fifteen.\" Her mother, who rarely bothered with a greeting, sounded like her usual imperious self."
quote: "Miranda let out the breath she'd finally gotten ahold of. She tried to think lofty, composed, queenlike thoughts, as she'd been taught when she first started competing in pageants. She pictured the crown on her head and imagined Bert Parks asking her the inevitable question about world peace."
quote: "\"Of course, Miranda. But I want you to call me in the morning and let me know how you're feeling. You don't think you're . . .\""
quote: "\"No, Mother.\" Miranda winced at the raw hope in her mother's voice."
quote: "She doubted she was pregnant. She never was. And this was the first time she was glad of it."
quote: "As she hung up the phone, Miranda's gaze flitted around the study she so rarely entered. For the first time she noticed how bare the desktop was, except for her carefully laid out cache of evidence; how empty the drawer had been, except for the obviously overlooked pictures."
quote: "Miranda's mouth went dry. Not at all regally, she shoved back from the desk and stood, her knees wobbling."
quote: "Slowly, with the bad feeling in the pit of her stomach spreading bodywide, she forced herself up the stairs to the master bedroom. Stopping at the dresser, she drew a steadying breath and pulled Tom's top drawer open. Though she wouldn't have been surprised by satin or lace, she found neither. Nor did she find anything in white cotton. The drawer was empty."
quote: "Miranda opened each drawer in turn, but all of Tom's clothes were gone. Trying not to hyperventilate, she moved to the walk-in closet and found more of the same. Or was that none of the same?"
quote: "Like a zombie, she turned and walked back into the bedroom stopping at the king-size bed she'd shared with Tom Smith for the last twelve years. A man she'd evidently never known nor understood."
quote: "Murmuring a small prayer, she picked up the envelope and pried it open with clumsy fingers."
quote: "The message was brief and to the point. Once again some part of Miranda's mind cried \"foul,\" because after this many years a woman deserved some warning. And she definitely deserved an explanation."
quote: "Miranda balled up the note and threw it at the dresser mirror while the pressure built behind her eyelids. Soon tears were streaming down her cheeks, puffing up her eyes, wreaking all kinds of havoc on her face."
quote: "She and Tom had loved each other once, she was sure of it. Maybe not with the searing intensity you read about in romance novels, but enough—she had thought—to weather the ups and downs of a lifetime. And when the initial excitement had worn off, she'd told herself that it had been replaced by something mellower and longer lasting."
quote: "She'd thought they had mutual respect and a certain amount of caring. But in fact they had cheating, and cross-dressing, followed by a very definite running away."
quote: "The tears were freefalling now, and Miranda didn't bother to wipe them away. She pictured the horrified look on her mother's face, but for once she was too miserable to care how puffy her eyes got or whether every last stitch of makeup was washed away. With a sniff, she wondered if it was like the tree falling in the empty forest. If no one was here to see her cry, did that mean that she wasn't?"
quote: "As if loosened by the thought, the tears fell faster. Miranda let the hot salty drops make tracks through her makeup, licking them away only when they reached the corners of her mouth."
quote: "She felt like a wounded animal, battered and bruised, with spears sticking out of its hide. But even in her misery she recognized that her heart, though it hurt, wasn't completely shattered. This realization made her cry even harder."
quote: "She lost track of how long she cried, but when she finally looked into the mirror a pitiful woman stared back. Miranda sat up straighter and squared her shoulders, but the woman still had tears streaming down her face."
quote: "Plucking a tissue from the nightstand, she blew her nose, loud, since there still wasn't anyone in her forest and might not ever be again."
quote: "At last she sniffled and hiccupped her way to a stop. Reaching for something to cling to, she grabbed on to the pageant instruction her mother had been drilling into her since her fifth birthday."
quote: "Okay, then. Sometimes you didn't win the crown. Sometimes, though she didn't have prior personal experience with this, you didn't even make the final five. You could still put on the smile, and you could still walk the walk. If there was anything she knew how to do, it was that."
quote: "Tom didn't want her? Fine. But he was going to have to tell her so in person. Right after he fixed whatever damage he'd done to Ballantyne. Then he could go off and dress up in some other company's lingerie to his heart's content."
quote: "Wendy clearly remembers her first encounter with Dick and Jane. She's still unsure why this otherwise hip twosome were so preoccupied with their dog, Spot, but two seconds after reading \"See Spot Run\" she was hooked on words—and books—for life."
quote: "Despite efforts to control this addiction, Wendy—who has been unable to find an appropriate 12-step program—remains incapable of putting down a book once she's begun reading it, and has faced many mornings bleary-eyed as a result."
quote: "It wasn't long after leaving broadcast production for motherhood that Wendy realized reading just wasn't enough anymore. Soon she was writing every bit as compulsively as she'd always read. Once again, her mornings were anything but bright-eyed and bushy-tailed."
quote: "Bantam Books and the rooster colophon are registered trademarks of Random House, Inc."
book path: 7 Days - Deon Meyer.epub.txt
beginWordsDict: {"1":[248],"chapter 1":[99]}
all keys in dictionary have one elem lists!
helper: 248,99
readFrom: 248





















































quote: "Whatever happened, he just didn't want to make a complete idiot of himself."
quote: "Detective Captain Benny Griessel was wearing a new suit of clothes that he could ill afford. There was a bouquet of flowers on the passenger seat, his hands gripping the steering wheel were clammy, and with all his being he yearned for the healing, calming powers of alcohol. Tonight he must just please not make a total idiot of himself. Not in front of Alexa Barnard, not in front of all the stars of the music world, not after all the past week's planning and preparation."
quote: "He'd started on Monday, with a haircut. Tuesday, Mat Joubert's wife, Margaret, had been his style consultant at Romens in Tyger Valley. 'It's smart casual, Benny, just a pair of chinos and a smart shirt,' she had said patiently in her charming English accent."
quote: "'No, I want a jacket too.' Griessel had dug in his heels, terrified of being caught between too 'casual' and not 'smart' enough. There would be some smart people there."
quote: "He had wanted a tie as well, but Margaret had put her foot down. 'Overdressed is worse than underdressed. No tie.' They had left with khaki chinos, a light blue cotton shirt, black belt, black shoes, a fashionable black jacket, and a credit card bill that made him shudder."
quote: "Since Wednesday he had been mentally preparing himself. He knew this thing, this event, had the potential to overwhelm him completely. His greatest fear was that he would swear, because that was what he always did when he got stressed. He would have to guard his tongue, all evening. No police-speak, no crude language, talk nice, stay calm. He had gone through it all in his imagination, visualised it, as Doc Barkhuizen, his sponsor at Alcoholics Anonymous, had prescribed."
quote: "If he could just have one drink before he met her. To keep his nerves from getting out of control. He would have to dry his hand on his new trousers first, he couldn't greet Lize Beekman with his palm all sweaty. 'Miss Beekman, it's an exceptional honour. Your music gives me great pleasure.' And she would say 'thank you', and he would leave it at that and go and find Alexa, because that was the only way he would keep from making a total idiot of himself."
quote: "The white Chana panel van stopped under the trees in Second Avenue, between the Livingstone High School and the back yard of the South African Police Service's Claremont Station."
quote: "It was a nondescript vehicle, a 2009 model bearing the marks of hard labour – a dent in the front bumper, scrapes and scratches on the doors at the back. The windows in the middle and rear were blanked out with cheap white paint. The side panels differed slightly in colour from the rest of the vehicle."
quote: "Behind the wheel, the sniper turned off the engine, put both hands on his knees and sat, for just a moment, dead still."
quote: "He wore a blue labourer's overall, slightly faded. Long blond hair hung down his back, a brown baseball cap was pulled down low over his eyes."
quote: "With deliberate focus he looked out of the passenger window at the deserted school grounds. Then right. He studied the high fence across the street, the double wire gate, and behind it, the SAPS yard, wrapped in the early-evening shadow of Table Mountain. It was quiet and deserted."
quote: "He made sure both doors in front were locked, clambered over the seat to the back. The storage space was untidy, boxes and trunks of metal, wood and cardboard. He sat down on a wooden box and loosened the home-made screen of faded yellow material from the carpet-lined roof. It separated him from the driver's cab, making him invisible to passers-by."
quote: "He took off the cap, laid it to one side, aware that he was breathing faster, his hands trembling slightly. He relaxed his shoulders with a forced sigh, bent down, opened a long, battered tool chest, and took out the removable tray. It was heavy, filled with well-worn tools – hammers, a collection of screwdrivers, cutters and pliers, metal saw blades. He put it gently down beside the chest, on the rubber matting covering the floor of the Chana."
quote: "There were two articles in the bottom of the red box – a firearm and a K-Way Kilimanjaro Trekking Pole."
quote: "He took out the hiking pole first, and propped it against his shoulder, picked up the rifle, pressed the silencer carefully through the black wrist strap on the end of the stick, so that the telescope of the rifle was not interfered with, and twisted the stick anti-clockwise until the loop was tight."
quote: "He pressed his cheek to the rifle butt, tested the height of the supporting hiking pole, and made an adjustment."
quote: "He slid the Chana's right side panel three centimetres to the right with the small handle he had attached. Then the magnetic panel outside, so he could aim the barrel and telescope outwards."
quote: "He pressed the rifle butt to his shoulder and looked at the SAPS car park through the scope. He adjusted the focus."
quote: "In front of the big Victorian house in Brownlow Street, Griessel picked up the bouquet, got out of the car and walked through the little garden gate to the front door."
quote: "Alexa Barnard was in the process of renovating the house. The ugly giant cactus against the front fence had been recently removed, the painters' scaffolding stood high against the walls."
quote: "It was all part of her recovery, he thought. Her new life."
quote: "He came to a halt at the front door, looked at his shoes. They gleamed."
quote: "He took a deep breath. What if he had misunderstood the whole thing, and it was a black-tie affair tonight, and Alexa opened the door in some exotic evening dress? Or it was totally informal, denims and open-neck shirts? He had never been to a music industry cocktail party before."
quote: "He rang the doorbell, heard her coming down the stairs."
quote: "Through the peephole the sniper saw the police van drive by close to the Chana. It slowed, ready for the turn in at the wide gate."
quote: "He waited for it to reappear in the car park in his field of vision. He kept his cheek pressed to the rifle butt, followed the van through the scope."
quote: "The van drove over the tarred surface to the middle of the open area. It parked behind two other SAPS vehicles where he couldn't see it."
quote: "As he aimed the cross hairs on the front of one of the vehicles, waiting for the policeman to appear, he suddenly became aware of the beating of his heart."
quote: "The rifle kicked softly against his shoulder, the muffled blurt of the shot was louder than he had expected, within the Chana's enclosed space."
quote: "For one fleeting moment he wondered, after everything, whether he would kiss her tonight for the first time."
quote: "She laughed and looked at him approvingly. 'You too, Benny.' Then, 'Are the flowers for me?'"
quote: "There was a blush on her cheeks, genuine appreciation for him, for this gesture."
quote: "'Thank you very much.' She stepped forward and kissed Griessel on the cheek."
quote: "He knew from experience the shot was barely audible outside, thanks to the silencer and the pieces of carpet glued to the Chana's interior. His palms perspired against the gun and his heart thumped. He worked the bolt, and the bullet casing sprang out, clinked against one of the toolboxes. He pushed another round into the chamber. He moved the weapon slightly, saw through the scope that the constable was unaware of the failed shot, his head turned away towards the mountain."
quote: "He aimed down, found the constable's legs in the cross hairs."
quote: "He led two, three centimetres ahead of moving legs, knee height, the panic blooming from the pit of his stomach, breathe, breathe, exhale slowly... He squeezed the trigger. Saw the constable fall."
quote: "Then, urgency, knowing he must concentrate now, the next sixty seconds were make or break, do everything exactly according to the plan."
quote: "Unwind the strap of the support stick. Withdraw the rifle from the loop. Lay the weapon in the toolbox. Put the tray over it. Close the box. The pole can stay there."
quote: "Do not look at the target, do not, but the anxiety threatened to overwhelm him, so he quickly turned his head to see. The constable was eighty metres away, lying there. He was looking down, probably at his leg."
quote: "Turn the key, start the Chana, pull away slowly, only ten metres and you will be out of sight, seconds, not enough for the constable to see you, to notice, he will be in shock, confused. Don't attract attention, do everything calmly, normally."
quote: "Inside. Lots of people. He quickly surveyed the men, what they were wearing. Relief washed over him, because there were a lot of jackets. He relaxed a little, everything was going to be OK."
quote: "Adam had been her husband. Benny had investigated his murder; that was how he had met her."
quote: "'I could have sworn you were Paul Eilers,' she said, disappointed, and then she was gone."
quote: "He recognised some of the music stars. Laurika Rauch folding Alexa's hands in hers, saying something with great tenderness. Karen Zoid and Gian Groen in conversation. Emo Adams making Sonja Herholdt laugh out loud."
quote: "A waiter pushed through the mass of bodies, came past with a tray full of champagne glasses, offered him one. He stared at the golden liquid, the bubbles lazily drifting upwards, and felt the stirring inside, the desire. He came to his senses, shook his head. No, thank you."
quote: "Maybe he ought to get himself a soft drink, something to hold in his hand, rather than just standing here, a dull island in a sea of glitterati. Look at Alexa, she was at home, in her element, she glowed."
quote: "When he met Schalk Joubert the moment was almost too big for him."
quote: "'Schalk, this is Benny Griessel, he also plays bass,' Alexa introduced him, and he could feel his face turn red. With a trembling hand, 'Pleased to meet you, it's a helluva privilege.' His voice was hoarse and he was startled by the swear word that slipped out."
quote: "And then his cellphone began to ring in his jacket pocket."
quote: "He dropped Lize Beekman's hand. Shame and humiliation burning through him, he mumbled, 'Excuse me.' He fumbled for his phone, turned away, pressed the instrument to his ear."
quote: "It was really Alexa's fault. She had wanted to know who he was keen to meet, two weeks ago already. From the beginning he had said nobody, he would just be around, available when she needed him. Because he knew he might lose it. But she had drawn the names out of him one by one, and she had said, 'I really want to do this for you,' and he had said, 'No, please,' but with ever diminishing conviction, because the prospect began to tempt him. Until he had agreed, for her sake, but the butterflies had been in his belly already, the faint terror, no, the premonition that he might not handle it well."
quote: "The burly Brigadier Musad Manie, commander of the Hawks, sat in the middle with a face of granite. On either side were Colonel Zola Nyathi, head of the Violent Crimes Group, and Griessel's immediate boss, and Colonel Werner du Preez, group head of Crimes Against the State (CATS). Afrika was on the opposite side of the table."
quote: "They greeted him, Manie invited him to sit down. Griessel saw there were files and documents in front of each of the senior officers."
quote: "'Sorry to interrupt your evening, Benny,' said the brigadier. 'But we've got a problem.'"
quote: "The brigadier hesitated, holding his breath, as if there was a lot more to say. Then he reconsidered, pushed a sheet of paper across the table. 'Let's start with this.'"
quote: "Griessel pulled the paper towards him, began to read, conscious of the four sets of eyes on him."
quote: "Today it is precisely 40 days since Hanneke Sloet was murdered. That is"
quote: "40 days of cover-up. You know why she was murdered."
quote: "This is my fifth message but you don't listen. Now you leave me no choice. Today I will shoot a policeman. In the leg. And every day I will shoot a policeman, until you charge the murderer."
quote: "If you don't have a report in the newspaper tomorrow that says you have reopened the Sloet case, the next bullet will not be in the leg."
quote: "'As you can see, this was sent this morning,' said the brigadier. 'And tonight Constable Brandon April was shot by a sniper in the leg in the parking lot of the Claremont Station. Just before seven.'"
quote: "'Long distance shot,' said Afrika. 'They're still looking for the bastard's vantage point.'"
quote: "'A young man,' said Afrika. 'Won't ever walk normally again. This crazy bastard...' and he pointed at the email in Griessel's hands, 'has written to me four times. Very confused emails, they don't make sense.' He tapped the file in front of him. 'You'll see.'"
quote: "The brigadier leaned forward. 'We would like to announce that you will be leading the reopened investigation into the Sloet case, Benny.'"
quote: "'I personally asked the brigadier if we could give it to you,' said Afrika."
quote: "'We are going on radio as well, but I don't know if that will help,' said Afrika."
quote: "'It's a bit of a mess,' said Nyathi, his frown deepening. 'To say the least.'"
quote: "'If you're willing, Benny. We will back you up. All of us.'"
quote: "'That's right,' said Manie and pushed the file across to Griessel. 'Mid-January. Green Point investigated the case...'"
quote: "Griessel took the fat pack of documents and tried to remember what he had heard about the Sloet murder. There had been a small media storm about six weeks back, his colleagues had discussed the case constantly."
quote: "The brigadier sighed. 'They found nothing. Nothing. Look at the investigation diary, you'll see, they followed up everything.'"
quote: "Griessel opened the dossier at the SAPS5 form in Section C, quickly paged through it, saw the extensive, detailed notes. 'You know how it's been since the Steyn case,' said Afrika. 'Everyone makes doubly sure, nobody takes chances any more. The Sloet investigation was by the book. The forensics were good, the footwork was thorough, they talked to everyone who lived and breathed, there's no motive that stands up to scrutiny.'"
quote: "'Except that she was a lawyer,' said Nyathi philosophically. 'Big clients. Big money.'"
quote: "Afrika sighed. 'Trouble is, she moved into the flat on the third of January, she was murdered on the eighteenth. She hadn't even finished unpacking. Nobody could tell the Green Point detectives if anything was stolen.'"
quote: "'Let's not disclose everything,' said Manie carefully to the general. 'We want Benny to look at this with fresh eyes. Work through the file from the beginning, see what he can find.'"
quote: "Griessel picked up the email. 'Brigadier, what about this \"cover-up... you know why she was murdered\"?'"
quote: "'The guy's a loony,' said Nyathi. 'White supremacist, hates us, hates the government, hates gay people, hates everybody.'"
quote: "'A terrorist, that's what he is, a terrorist hiding behind an anonymous email address. Untraceable.' Afrika slid the thin folder that lay in front of him over to Benny as well. 'Here are the other letters. You'll see.'"
quote: "'Mbali will be our official investigator, Brigadier,' said du Preez. 'She arrived back from Amsterdam yesterday...'"
quote: "'Amsterdam, oh, Amsterdam,' said Afrika, shaking his head, but with good humour."
quote: "The unit had been abuzz the past week, over 'the incident in Amsterdam'. The stout Mbali Kaleni, a member of du Preez's CATS team for the past six months, had been one of a group of detectives taking a course in Holland. Something had happened to her – according to the bush telegraph it was a great embarrassment. But, despite pointed speculation in the corridors, nobody really knew what had happened. Except the top management, and they were as silent as the grave."
quote: "'You will have your hands full, Benny, but it's important that you know what progress CATS are making, what they are looking into. And if you find something that could help them...'"
quote: "'You know how we work, Benny,' said Colonel du Preez. 'One big team...'"
quote: "Nyathi folded his arms and sighed. 'Benny, if word gets out there's someone blackmailing us, shooting policemen... Feeding frenzy for the press, public panic.'"
quote: "'Cloete will keep the constable's knee out of the papers. Just so you know, Benny,' said Manie. 'Please be careful with the press. In any case, Adjutant-Officer Nxesi is the Green Point detective who handled the Sloet case. You can call him, any time, he's ready to come in.'"
quote: "'Our whole team is ready to support you,' said Nyathi."
quote: "'Not to put any extra pressure on you, Benny,' Afrika said seriously, 'but you must get moving. This mad bastard is going to keep on shooting policemen until you solve the case.'"
quote: "At half past ten on a Saturday night Griessel walked to his office down the deathly silent, wide corridors of the DPCI – the Hawks – building. He was amazed at the effect that the Steyn affair, which Manie had referred to a few minutes ago, had had on the SAPS this past year."
quote: "Estelle Steyn, a newly qualified young chef, had been strangled eighteen months ago in her Pinelands town house – with a piece of material, probably a tie. No signs of breaking and entering, theft or sexual assault – it must have been someone whom she knew and trusted. Like her tie-wearing fiancé, the sombre, emotionless KPMG consultant with cold eyes and a key to her door. Within seventy-two hours he had been arrested and charged, and the media and fascinated public immediately declared him guilty. Because Estelle Steyn was a joyous, lively bundle of sunny energy, a brilliant cook with a bright future according to her colleagues. Alongside her blonde, smiling beauty on the front pages of the papers, her fiancé's photo looked brooding and forbidding, the taciturn stare turned away from the camera. Like a man burdened by his misdeeds."
quote: "Like a pack of wild dogs, the defence ripped apart the carcass of poor crime-scene management, the narrow focus of the investigation, and the creative assumptions of the forensic testimony."
quote: "After seven months of sensation, the fiancé walked away a free man."
quote: "The media scolded and squawked, the public were shocked and dumbstruck. Months later best-selling books by criminologists and forensics experts analysed and criticised every SAPS misstep. In parliament, time and again the opposition used the whole as a stick with which to beat the government – the damage and scandal would not go away."
quote: "The career of the investigating officer, Fanie Fick, was over. He was tucked away in the Information Management Centre (IMC) of the Hawks now, retrained and redeployed as a computer analyst, but everyone knew he would not be promoted again. Behind his back they talked about 'Fanie Fucked', the guy who relieved his pain after hours every day at the Drunken Duck in Stikland."
quote: "That was why the Sloet file that Griessel carried to his office was so painfully detailed and 'by the book'. The police service's wounds were still raw, their honour deeply dented, the fear of another detective scapegoat, of more punishment and criticism from top management, the press and Joe Public, loomed large."
quote: "That was why General John Afrika had sat in on the meeting at the DPCI tonight, and why he had asked for a specific investigator."
quote: "Fear. The Hawks did not usually accept orders or input from a provincial head of investigations. They were too protective of their independence, of their own structures."
quote: "Fear, he thought, was also the reason they were allowing the gunman to blackmail them. In the old days the SAPS would not have bowed to threats from a sharpshooter."
quote: "Griessel sighed, unlocked his office door. It was a recipe for trouble."
quote: "He arranged the files on his desk, first opening the slim one that John Afrika had given him. He began to read the emails in chronological order, initially struggling to focus, too many things had happened too fast tonight."
quote: "You know very well who murdered Hanneke Sloet. Arrest the communist, or I will hand everything to the press."
quote: "The truth will come out about the communist and about the money he is paying you. You are all equally corrupt. Your time is running out."
quote: "You have three weeks to arrest Hanneke Sloet's murderers. The process to let justice prevail has begun."
quote: "I warned you twice, but you did nothing. What is to come is on your and your communist bedfellows' consciences, not mine. You leave me no choice."
quote: "Griessel put the email down and arranged all five in a row, his eyes moving from one to the other."
quote: "When he was done, he propped his chin in his hands, and thought."
quote: "The dates of the emails. The pace had increased systematically. The first two were a week apart. Then six days. Then five. A fixed rhythm. Except for the last one."
quote: "In the first and second emails, the references to 'communist'. Singular. Then it became 'murderers'. And 'communist bedfellows'. But back to the singular 'murderer' in the last one."
quote: "The sudden jump to Bible verses, the religious justification, the building momentum of a crusade. But in the last one there was a stronger style, more confidence. And purpose. Suddenly a man with a mission."
quote: "They were usually media parasites, studying every piece that appeared about a case, reacting to it, quoting it, embroidering on it."
quote: "They almost always gave themselves a name when they wrote, some mythological or astrological or awe-inspiring pseudonym."
quote: "This one had a new tactic with every communication. This one went abruptly silent for two weeks before the final email. Which he had sent in daytime, a Saturday morning, twelve hours before he went out shooting."
quote: "This one had carried out his threats, he had done the one thing that would ignite the wrath of the SAPS – he had shot a policeman. And he was threatening to do it again."
quote: "He put the emails back one by one in their file and drew the hefty Sloet folder closer. He opened it, he wanted to start at the beginning, take a look at the murder scene first, the photos, the forensic report, the pathologists..."
quote: "He was brought back from his reverie. 'Come in,' said Griessel."
quote: "Brigadier Musad Manie's nickname in the DPCI was 'the Camel'. Because 'Musad', one of the Hawk detectives had learned from a Muslim friend, meant 'loose camel' in Arabic. And when the tall, lean Colonel Zola Nyathi was appointed head of the Violent Crimes group – with his slow and stately, deliberate, slightly bent forward walk – he was swiftly dubbed 'the Kameelperd' or in the simpler English, 'the Giraffe'."
quote: "It was the Giraffe who ducked through the door now, his shaven head shining under the fluorescent lights of Griessel's office."
quote: "'No, please, Benny, don't get up...' He walked up to the desk, his slender fingers putting down a car key."
quote: "'You know that we approach investigations as one big team.'"
quote: "'Yes, sir. I just want to study the files first...'"
quote: "'I understand that, Benny. But when you're ready, get the guys involved. I've already called Vaughn, he's on standby...'"
quote: "Nyathi tapped a finger on the case files, his voice suddenly soft and confidential. 'Look,' he said. 'You're an old hand. I don't have to spell it out for you...' The colonel hesitated, lifted his head, looked Griessel right in the eyes. 'You come talk to me, Benny. Or to the Brig. You find any monkey business anywhere, you come to us...'"
quote: "'Yes, sir,' he said in the hope that he would be able to decipher what the Giraffe meant later."
quote: "Griessel sat and looked at the door. Manie and Nyathi had also been taken by surprise over this affair, by Afrika's request and involvement. They were playing along, but cautiously."
quote: "But he appreciated Nyathi's gesture. The problem was that he was not entirely convinced of this we-are-one-big-family-and-we-work-as-a-team strategy of the Hawks. He hadn't been part of the unit for even three weeks, he had only recently learned that JOC stood for Joint Operational Centre – group heads and detectives of the various DPCI units thrown together under one operational leader to investigate a case. Too many people – a recipe for chaos. He was accustomed to one shift partner, or to working alone, especially during the past year when he had been in Afrika's office."
quote: "He sighed. He still had no idea why Afrika had transferred him to the Hawks."
quote: "He reached for the case file, took out the crime-scene photographs one by one and arranged them in rows in front of him."
quote: "In full colour, Hanneke Sloet lay on the big, highly polished marble tiles beside a single round pillar. The red-black blood in stark contrast to her sleeveless white dress and the light grey floor. She lay on her back, right arm over her body, the right hand pressed to the wound in her belly. She had tried to stem the massive blood loss to the very end."
quote: "Her bare left arm was slightly outstretched, her hand open."
quote: "Her head on the floor, the back of the skull resting in blood, her dark hair fallen across her face, covering her eyes and nose, but the mouth was visible. A full mouth, dark red lipstick, almost the same colour as the blood."
quote: "She was barefoot, the dress with the skirt shifted up, her legs exposed to far above the knee."
quote: "It looked like a single wound, just below and to the right of her heart."
quote: "He wanted to get a feel for the scene, and studied the photos one by one. The apartment was new and modern, the walls and the single pillar were snow white, the floor grey and shiny, the windows large and without curtains – they looked out on a wide balcony outside, and over the multicoloured Bo-Kaap and Signal Hill."
quote: "Sloet lay in a spacious room. Behind her, in the centre, was a white couch and two chairs, square and stylish, on a loose white shagpile carpet. Against the long wall was one huge, unframed picture, the kind of modern art that Griessel did not understand – shapes and stripes in white and grey, like an aerial photo of waves in the sea. A single glass-and-chrome shelf housed a hi-fi system and two small speakers."
quote: "In the corner furthest from where Sloet lay, there was a spiral staircase that led to an upper level – gleaming light brown wood, with a narrow stainless steel rail."
quote: "At the window, a white telescope on a tripod pointed at the buildings of the city."
quote: "Behind the pillar there was a small open-plan kitchen – modern cupboards behind opaque olive-green glass, and an angular chrome-coloured fridge."
quote: "The front door was three metres to the left of the kitchen, and four metres from where Hanneke Sloet's lifeless body lay."
quote: "He looked at the last row of photos, of the two bedrooms in the apartment. The larger one was clearly where Sloet had slept. For the most part it was painfully neat. A wide double bed on a square white platform. The bed was made up with snow-white linen, with two dark brown pillows, matching the dark wood of the bedside cupboards."
quote: "The second bedroom was smaller. A single bed, without bedding, cardboard boxes on it, unopened. An empty white bookshelf, two rolled-up Persian carpets."
quote: "He paged to the pathologist's report in Section A, and was relieved to see that Prof Phil Pagel had done the autopsy. Pagel was the smartest man he knew, vastly experienced, extremely thorough. Above all, Pagel knew how to write a report so that detectives could both understand and use it. At the top there was always a summary that made the investigating officer's life easier – normal language, numbered points, short sentences and paragraphs, useful information."
quote: "With the new information in mind, Griessel examined the crime-scene photos again. Stabbed only once. She lay four metres from the front door, and there were no cuts on her hands to show that she had tried to defend herself."
quote: "No obvious signs of robbery, the brigadier had said. And according to Pagel, no signs of sex. That meant an absence of semen, of bruising on the victim."
quote: "He wondered who had found the victim. How did the building's security work?"
quote: "They excited him immediately, making him forget what he was looking for."
quote: "All three photos had been taken in a studio, under professional lighting. In the first, only her head, right shoulder and part of her arm were visible. She wore a thin white dress, etched against the smooth, tanned skin of her shoulder and arm. Her head was angled to the right, she was looking down, her eyes veiled, the right side of her face in dark shadow that accentuated the full lips and strong cheekbone. A single strand of hair draped across her face, down to her chin. The shoulder and arm were feminine, muscular. The grey background was an interesting texture, out of focus."
quote: "Lovely woman. And she knew it. She liked it, she was displaying it a little."
quote: "The second photo was of her upper body, her head slightly dipped so that her dark eyes looked up at the camera. She had an easy smile, showing a narrow gap between her front teeth. Her hair was tied back now. A thin, tight-fitting and collarless blouse with a low neckline displayed the full, prominent breasts, with a certain innocence."
quote: "The third was a nude study, dark and artistic. Tasteful. The background was pitch black, the lighting from the right and behind, her body turned, so that only a cheekbone, the tip of her nose, a large, round earring, the slim line of her neck, a shoulder, a single perfect breast and nipple, a hip and the outline of her leg were visible."
quote: "He suspected the photos had been taken recently, she seemed mature, close to her age of thirty-three, according to the file."
quote: "He arranged the photographs in a row. Looked over them again. What personality, what reason had motivated her to go to all this trouble? How many hours, to make the appointment with the photographer, choose the right clothes, complete the photo sessions? This woman, the corporate lawyer."
quote: "And the breasts. Unnaturally large and perfect, like someone who had had them surgically enhanced."
quote: "For whose benefit? he wondered. For whom had she had the photos taken?"
quote: "Fuck. He ought to have called her. He looked at his watch. It was nearly eleven."
quote: "'No, this is not Alexa,' said a man's voice. Hostile. 'She asked me to call you to come and collect her.'"
quote: "He opened the rear door of the BMW 130i, put the files on the back seat, slammed the door shut in frustration, got in the front and drove away."
quote: "He should have known that Alexa used to drink because she suffered from stage fright, and tonight was a sort of stage, her first interaction with the music people in years, her timid return to the limelight. He should have thought, should have controlled his language and his reactions. He should have told the brigadier he couldn't come right away, he should have taken Alexa home first. But no, all he could think of was his own humiliation. He was a dolt, a fucking idiot policeman."
quote: "He had protested and said they were only friends, he could support her, encourage her, they could attend AA gatherings together. And Doc had just shaken his head and said, 'Careful.'"
quote: "Why did he always do that? Why was his life never simple? Never fucking ever. He was forty-five, the age at which you are supposed to reach inner calm and wisdom and resignation, the age at which you are supposed to have all your life shit sorted out. But not him. His life was constant chaos. An endless stream of trouble, a never-ending struggle to cope. But he just could not win, it was one thing on top of another. You could never get ahead."
quote: "He had only just, this past month, started to get used to the whole divorce thing, tried to make peace with the fact that he and Anna were over. Totally, irretrievably over. He still struggled with the fact that she was ever more seriously involved with a lawyer. A fucking lawyer. But he was working on that, fuck knows, he was trying."
quote: "He had cut back to pay the maintenance, and his contribution to Carla's studies, and he could almost live with that, though he felt he was being ripped off, he paid far more than Anna, and they earned about the same."
quote: "He'd worked hard the past weeks to fit in with the Hawks, the new relationship, the new structures, the new ranks. Everybody's rank had changed, back to the military hierarchy of the old days. Everybody's except his own, because a captain was still a captain. But he had accepted that too."
quote: "He had got back into a routine with his children. Carla, who was studying drama at Stellenbosch. Drama, as though she hadn't had enough drama in her life with an alcoholic policeman father and the whole divorce disaster. Drama. Where would the child find work? And his son, Fritz, who might or might not pass Matric, because he was playing guitar for Jack Parow's band. Jack Parow. Hip hop or rap or whatever you called it, swore worse than a policeman. But what could he do? Fritz had talent – Jack had approached him personally, come and play for me. Griessel had made peace with the fact that the world had changed, that children had choices today, that their approach to careers was different."
quote: "Peace with many things. On the brink of getting things straight."
quote: "He would just have to accept it. He was a fuck-up."
quote: "And tomorrow, when she was sober, he would explain to Alexa about the Sloet case and ask her forgiveness, and get her to phone the other two, so she could tell them, it was all due to admiration and nerves, maybe it happened to other people too, maybe he wasn't the first."
quote: "He stopped at the Artscape. His cellphone rang. It must be the centre manager again, about Alexa. He answered hastily, to say he had arrived."
quote: "'Captain, it's Tommy Nxesi from Green Point.' There was a wary note to his voice."
quote: "It took a moment to register – it was the warrant officer who had originally investigated the Sloet case."
quote: "'No...' he realised the detective had been waiting for him to call, at the request of John Afrika. 'Sorry, Tommy, I should have let you know...' Griessel thought of what lay ahead, with Alexa. 'You don't need to... Can we talk tomorrow?'"
quote: "'Thanks...' then he remembered, he wanted to have a look at the scene of the crime. 'Tommy, do you still have the keys to Sloet's apartment?'"
quote: "He was shocked when he saw her in the manager's office. Her makeup was smudged, her hair hung over her face, a mess, the neckline of her dress had slipped down too far, a sandal lay to one side, the other on her foot. She sat on a chair with her legs apart, elbows on her knees, swaying from side to side."
quote: "She looked up slowly. He could see she was very drunk. She battled to focus. Then slowly her face crumpled. She tried to straighten up, but it was hard. She began to cry."
quote: "He went to her, helped her up, tried to pull her dress higher, but she wrapped her arms around him. She smelled of liquor and perfume."
quote: "'I'm here,' he said. 'I'm sorry.' He put his arms around her, held her tightly."
quote: "Her face was in his neck and he felt the hot, wet tears trickling down him. 'I'm such...' she said, the sibilants coming out with difficulty. 'I'm such a loser, Benny.'"
quote: "The manager stepped around them, bent and picked up her sandal and her little evening bag that was hanging over the arm of the chair. He held them out to Griessel, the shoe by one finger, as though it was contaminated, disgust on his face."
quote: "Benny took the shoe and the bag. Alexa sagged against him."
quote: "In the car she talked disjointedly, her head against the window."
quote: "'Intruder, Benny. That's all I am... they know...' She struggled to open her bag, took out her cigarettes, dropped the lighter."
quote: "He parked in front of her house, found her key in the evening bag. He got out."
quote: "'Don't leave me,' she pleaded, the voice of a child."
quote: "He got back in. 'I won't leave you. I just want to unlock the door.'"
quote: "She looked at him uncomprehendingly. 'I'm an alcoholic, you know.'"
quote: "He nodded, got out again, walked quickly to the front door, unlocked it. Jogged back to the car, opened the passenger door. 'Let's get you in the house.'"
quote: "She lifted her left arm slowly. He bent, pulled her arm over his back, pulled her up and out. She was unsteady. He shuffled through the gate with her, up onto the veranda. Inside he struggled to find the light switch, then he helped her slowly up the stairs. Her other sandal came off, rolled down two steps. They shuffled down the passage, into her room. He sat her down on the bed. She toppled sideways, her head on the bedspread. He switched on the bedside light, stood a moment undecided."
quote: "He had to fetch her bag, in the car. Had to lock the vehicle."
quote: "He brought his head close, so he could hear what she said. But she didn't speak. She sang. The song that had made her famous. 'Soetwater', Sweet Water. Softly, nearly inaudible, but perfect, in tune, in her unique, rich voice."
quote: "'I'm just going to lock the car,' he said."
quote: "He walked fast. On the way down the stairs he remembered she had tried to commit suicide, the last time she had been drunk. When her husband had died."
quote: "He fetched the handbag, her cigarettes and lighter, then the stack of files, locked the car, and jogged back."
quote: "With her clumsy assistance he got both big earrings off and put them on the bedside cupboard. 'Try to sleep a little,' he said."
quote: "She looked at him with new focus and control. Her lips opened slightly. She put her hands behind his head and pulled him closer and kissed him, her mouth open and wet, he tasted alcohol on her. She pulled him down, to the bed."
quote: "He put his hands carefully on her shoulders, pushed her away gently."
quote: "Eventually she lay back against the cushions. He picked up her legs, put them on the bed. She turned her back to him. He walked around the bed, found the edge of the bedspread and folded it over her."
quote: "Then he stood there, for ten minutes, and listened as her breathing slowed. Until she slept."
quote: "He looked at his watch. It was ten past twelve. Sunday morning."
quote: "He worked on the case file until nearly half past three."
quote: "The damage, he thought. Of self doubt, of a lifetime of insecurity and desire for success with music, the damage of a man who cheated on her, the damage of his death. But above all the damage of drink. If you gave in, if you threw four months of sobriety in the water, if you had to look your own weakness in the eye, realise once more you were not strong enough. To get up again..."
quote: "She lay on the bed and sang 'Soetwater' and it burned through him, because there was a searching in her voice, a longing for a moment in her past when everything had been good and right. And he knew – you never get that back, no matter how hard you try. That was why he had felt like weeping with her at that moment."
quote: "And the taste of alcohol in her mouth. Lord, he could taste it still. When she had kissed him, he hadn't thought of lovemaking, he had had a sudden and violent longing for the bottle. And for the place where she was, that soft nebulous world of drunkenness where everything was round and harmless, no edges and corners to hurt you."
quote: "Doc Barkhuizen was a clever man. But he would be able to tell Doc that tonight he had had another revelation, gained an insight. When he had pulled the bedspread over Alexa. A strong feeling of déjà vu, because he had been there before – on the bed, dead drunk, his ex, Anna, pulling the blanket over him with compassion and patience and love. How many times? How many evenings and nights? How had she put up with it for so long?"
quote: "He felt the loathing for himself come and sit in his throat, and forced himself back to the case file."
quote: "Hanneke Sloet was born on 18 June 1977 in Ladybrand in the Free State. She graduated with an LLB from Stellenbosch University in 1999, and in 2001 she began work at the law firm Silberstein Lamarque, first as articled clerk, and then in 2002 as attorney in the corporate law department. In 2009 she was promoted to partner."
quote: "Up till December the previous year she lived alone in a town house in Stellenbosch, and commuted by car every day to Silberstein Lamarque House in Riebeek Street in Cape Town, where she had an office on the eighth floor. She bought the apartment in 36 on Rose for 3,850,000 rand ten months ago with a mortgage from Nedbank, but the development was only completed the previous December. On Monday 3 January she moved in on the fifth floor."
quote: "She wasn't in a serious or long-term relationship when she died."
quote: "The two uniformed policemen simply established that Sloet was dead, left and alerted Green Point Station that they had a homicide. Warrant Officer Tommy Nxesi from Green Point and a colleague, Sergeant Vernon April, took over the crime scene officially at 11.35, and summoned Forensics and the pathologist."
quote: "And that was all. No dust, soil samples or tracks. No lip prints, residue, strange chemicals or usable DNA."
quote: "He had to patch her working life together from the various statements of her colleagues. Hanneke Sloet at the time of her death was involved in the conclusion of a business transaction whereby Ingcebo Resources Limited would acquire a shareholding in Gariep Minerals Limited, a process that had been on the go for thirteen months. Six other employees of Silberstein Lamarque were part of the legal team, while a transaction consultant, four banks, a management consultation company, and two other law firms were also involved."
quote: "Apparently it was work without risk, without secrets or sensation."
quote: "Her bank statements showed only a woman who made good money and spent it well, but her financial affairs were not out of control, there was nothing that drew his attention."
quote: "By twenty past two he could no longer concentrate. He gathered all the documents together and put them back carefully in the file. He went and listened at Alexa's bedroom door. She was sleeping."
quote: "He urinated in the second bathroom, washed his hands and face. Walked back to the room, closed the door, undressed. He set the alarm on his cellphone for seven o'clock and climbed into the bed, his weariness a heavy weight. Long day."
quote: "There was something about the case that bothered him. Not an obvious flaw, just a vague impression. Of an investigator who had looked in all the right places, asked all the right questions. Thorough, complete, by the book. And nothing more. No flair. No intuition. He knew how investigations worked, you went through your routine, starting with the people closest to the victim, and, if that yielded nothing, you spread your net wider and wider. Until somewhere you came across something that stuck in the back of your mind, a suspicion, a false note, and then you dug there, you focused, you applied pressure. And nine times out of ten you were right."
quote: "He hadn't found that in the Sloet file. The trouble with station detectives was partly the training, the strong emphasis on forensic aids and technology. Intuition didn't count any more. And the lack of experience, because they were frequently young, often working in unfamiliar surroundings, other cultural and language groups, under a lot of pressure from all sides. They did their best, but..."
quote: "It wasn't robbery. The laptop and the cellphone there on the work table... Even if no one could say whether anything was missing from the apartment, theft was most likely not the motive."
quote: "Hanneke Sloet was working upstairs in her bedroom. The glass of wine was there, the computer, the files."
quote: "And the photographs. Sloet having them taken deliberately in a studio. Seductive. Naked."
quote: "Maybe she didn't have time for relationships. In the gym at six in the morning, only home at eight at night. Last year she was still driving in from Stellenbosch, back in the evening."
quote: "He must remember to ask Tommy Nxesi where they had found the photos. Where had she kept them?"
quote: "He kept his thoughts deliberately on the case, because he didn't want to relive his great embarrassment. But somewhere on the edge of sleep he remembered with a degree of satisfaction that someone had mistaken him for Paul Eilers tonight."
quote: "He dreamed of Lize Beekman. They were walking down a busy street and he was endlessly trying to explain why he had said such a ridiculous thing in front of her. But she wasn't paying attention to him. She disappeared, melted away in the crowd and people looked at him with great disdain on their faces."
quote: "The cellphone's alarm jerked him awake and he half sat up, not sure where he was."
quote: "He saw the file on the dressing table. The events of yesterday slowly penetrated through to him. He rubbed his palms over his face. He got up slowly, dressed and went to the bathroom to empty his bladder and wash his face. Then he took a cautious look in Alexa's bedroom."
quote: "He considered his options. He had to go home, shower, shave, brush his teeth and eat breakfast – he hadn't eaten a thing last night. And then meet Tommy Nxesi at Sloet's apartment. But he didn't want just to leave Alexa like this..."
quote: "He made a decision, carried the files down to his car, found the notebook and pen in the glove compartment. The morning was bright and clear without a breath of wind, the mountain and cliffs glowing. He stood in the street for a moment taking it in, then he jogged back, sat down again at the dressing table in the second bedroom to write her a note."
quote: "He tore the page out, tiptoed into her room and put it on the bedside cabinet where she would see it."
quote: "The sparkling new five-storey building at 36 on Rose was designed to represent the Bo-Kaap architecture with a modern twist. The lower levels were colourfully painted, just like the little labourers' houses further down Rose Street."
quote: "Nxesi was waiting at the front door. He was the same height as Griessel, but broader, slightly bow-legged. His black-framed glasses and brown tweed jacket gave him a professorial look. His greeting was friendly. 'I've got the keys, but security will have to take us up to the floor.' He had a township accent. He held the door open for Griessel."
quote: "'Sorry about this, Tommy,' Griessel said as he walked in."
quote: "'It's nothing, Captain. I expected you guys to take over the case long ago.'"
quote: "The entrance foyer was new and shiny. A man and a woman in security uniforms sat behind a desk. Nxesi pointed at the TV camera behind them, on the wall. 'The CCTV and the card system in the lifts should have been operational by the end of December, but at the end of January they were still finishing up. On January eighteenth there was no security except these people at reception. Trouble is, at the time, an intruder could have entered via the parking garage.'"
quote: "He showed his SAPS identification card to the female guard, spoke to her in Xhosa. She made them sign a book first, a precaution Griessel never could fathom, since you could write absolutely anything there."
quote: "Then she led them to the lift. 'Nowadays you have to push a card in if you want to go up.' Nxesi pointed to a slot just above the button panel of the lift. 'Then you press the right floor. If you press a number that is not programmed on your card, it won't work. Coming down, it works automatically.'"
quote: "'No. Two days after the murder, then it was working.' He shook his head."
quote: "The security guard made a noise of protest. Nxesi adjusted his glasses. 'They're touchy about the murder, because half the flats are still for sale.'"
quote: "At the door, while he unlocked, Nxesi said, 'Everything is just as it was, because the case is still open. But the lawyers have started to nag the SC, they want us to clean up, so they can wind up the estate. The parents inherit everything. They live in Jeffreys Bay. Retired.'"
quote: "He pushed the door open, waited for Griessel to go ahead."
quote: "Griessel confirmed that there was a peephole in the front door, and a security chain and bolt, undamaged. Then he stopped, he wanted to get a feel for the room first."
quote: "It was smaller than the impression created by the photographs, but still spacious and attractive and modern. The morning light shining through the large windows made it look cheerful, and the view south included a part of Signal Hill. To his left was the single pillar, the kitchen behind it. He heard the quiet murmur of the fridge, an expensive double-door. The couch and chairs stood between the pillar and the windows, in the centre of the room. The painting hung on the wall to his right, above the stereo. The artwork looked more interesting than it did in the photographs. At the window stood the white telescope on a tripod."
quote: "He looked around, saw Nxesi watching him intently. 'Can I see the key, Tommy?'"
quote: "The Xhosa detective held it out to him. 'This one is for the front door.' He showed the silver Yale key. 'This one is for her car, the other is for those cupboards up there.' The bunch was attached to a little metal ring."
quote: "'Just for the cupboards, and her car. She kept them in the drawer beside her bed.'"
quote: "'It's still here, down in the parking garage. Mini Cooper S Convertible. Forensics have been through it. Nothing.'"
quote: "On the shiny, grey marble tiles, three paces from the entrance, was the first fan of fine brown dried blood spray, circled in black by Forensics. About a metre further on was the wide, hardened pool where she had lain."
quote: "Griessel reversed, as far as the threshold, took two steps forward, another shuffle. The murderer would have stood here. The mortal wound was inflicted right here. She had staggered backwards, probably from the violence of it. Then collapsed."
quote: "Griessel bent down, examined the first, delicate spatters. They had been perfectly preserved, no footprints, no smearing."
quote: "He walked past the pillar, to the kitchen. The sink was empty. The worktop was clean, just as it was in the photos."
quote: "Nxesi came and stood with him. 'Nothing. She ate at work. Ordered a Thai take-away, around about six-forty in the evening. The delivery service left it at reception at Silberstein House at five past seven. Then they phoned her and she went to collect it. The boxes were in her trash. That's why the pathologist was so certain about the time of death. He says that last meal had barely left the stomach, there was very little in the small intestine. If she ate just before seven, then the time of death was very close to ten o'clock.'"
quote: "'When I... They did it to me too, Tommy. Gave my case to someone else. I know how it feels.'"
quote: "'Captain, it's OK.' He fiddled with his glasses again."
quote: "'It's easier when you can read the whole case file first. All the footwork is done already.'"
quote: "'It doesn't matter. Let's just catch the one who did this.'"
quote: "Griessel noted Nxesi's earnest expression. 'Thanks, Tommy.' He pointed at the top floor. 'There was a wine glass, beside her computer. But no bottle...'"
quote: "Nxesi opened a door of the free-standing kitchen counter, and pointed. 'The wine was here, Forensics took the bottle. Red wine, opened, the bottle was about half full.'"
quote: "Sloet must have poured the wine, put the bottle away. 'She was tidy.'"
quote: "'You should see the cupboards. It's like a shop.'"
quote: "Nxesi showed him a set of drawers. 'The cutlery is on top, the utensils in the third one,' he said."
quote: "Griessel pulled open the top drawer. Silver cutlery, forks, knives, spoons, teaspoons. Nothing that could remotely match the measurements of the murder weapon."
quote: "'There are three kitchen knives in the other one,' Nxesi said. 'But nothing that comes close.'"
quote: "Benny opened the third drawer. It wasn't very full. A couple of serving and salad spoons, a modest collection of cooking utensils. And three knives with black handles, different sizes, the longest was a butcher's knife, but the dimensions were still too modest to have been the murder weapon."
quote: "'Even if there was a bigger one in that set, it would still be too narrow,' said Nxesi. 'I searched the flat, Captain. If she had a dagger or an assegai... No trace. I don't know...'"
quote: "Griessel closed the drawer, walked over to the fridge, opened it. There wasn't much in there. Two containers of expensive flavoured yoghurt, and one of feta cheese. Two kinds of yellow cheese, each sealed in its own plastic cover, a two-litre bottle of orange juice, one third empty. A bottle of white wine, unopened, a container of margarine, a Tupperware tub with what looked like beetroot salad in it."
quote: "He opened the freezer compartment. A tub of ice cream, a few bags of frozen vegetables, a single bag of chicken thighs."
quote: "Upstairs he first looked into the spare bedroom, the one with the sealed cartons. The boxes were neatly stacked on the single bed, in line with the corners. Two rolled-up Persian carpets were pushed up against the empty white bookshelf, so you could walk to the bed easily."
quote: "Griessel went over to the bed and inspected the boxes. They were still sealed with the broad sticky tape that removals companies used."
quote: "Nxesi followed him as he went out, then down the short passage to the master bedroom. At the end of the passage, just before the bedroom door on the left, was a large window with a view over the city."
quote: "The bedroom was big. Built-in cupboards against a long wall. Sloet's desk opposite, between the two large windows, the cream-coloured curtains closed, just as they were in the photos. Against the door stood the wide, minimalistic double bed, left of that the entrance to the bathroom. On the floor was a big oriental carpet, also cream-coloured, with delicate brown patterning."
quote: "The desk top was clear now, the computer and files removed. He drew a breath to ask about the laptop, but his cellphone rang. He pulled it out of his shirt pocket. ALEXA, the screen read."
quote: "'Benny, I can't do it.' There was utter terror in her voice."
quote: "He walked out into the passage before asking her, 'What do you mean?'"
quote: "'Alexa, no, don't worry about it, I'll soon be...'"
quote: "He didn't know what to say to her, suddenly aware of his inability to find the right words, the right approach. 'It won't,' was the best he could do. 'You are Xandra Barnard.'"
quote: "'I am nothing, Benny.' The tears were close in her voice."
quote: "'I... Alexa, just give me an hour. Have you had any coffee yet?'"
quote: "'Go and make yourself some coffee. Eat something. Bath... I'll come as soon as I can. I'm at work...'"
quote: "'I promise you I will come as soon as I can.'"
quote: "'I'll call you back. Will you keep your cellphone with you?'"
quote: "'There's no need to be sorry, we'll talk about it...' He had to ring off, Nxesi was waiting. 'Just let me finish up here.'"
quote: "'I shouldn't have bothered you, I'm sorry. Bye, Benny.' The line went dead."
quote: "He stood there and looked out of the window with the city view, but he could see nothing. He would have to wrap this up. There was no alcohol in Alexa's house, but he would have to stop her before she went to a hotel. That was what she did, because 'off-licences are such sad places'. He knew all the danger signs, he knew she would go looking for a drink at the Mount Nelson."
quote: "Nxesi had the attitude of a man who had heard everything despite doing his best not to, but out of decency didn't want to show it."
quote: "The warrant officer made a gesture that dismissed it as nothing."
quote: "Griessel stood there, trying to gather his thoughts. There was something important that he wanted to ask."
quote: "'No. It was off. But her emails show she was sitting here working. At about half past nine she sent an email to Van Eeden. He's the... deal maker, the one who put the whole merger together. Official stuff, a sort of progress report.'"
quote: "'He is the same one she sent an SMS to about ten to ten?'"
quote: "Nxesi nodded. 'He said it was about that email – she let him know she had sent it.'"
quote: "'And all the files that were lying here, were they about the transaction?'"
quote: "'She sat here working until just before ten.' The confirmation of the suspicion that he had gained from the photos, and the first inkling that he would find nothing new here."
quote: "He went into the bathroom. A shower, the entire width of the rear wall, with a glass panel in front. Where the single male pubic hair had been found. A large, white, modern bath. More grey marble tiles. Brown cabinets, brown towels. A brown cloth laundry basket hanging from a dark wood framework. He lifted the flap. It was empty."
quote: "They walked back to the bedroom. Griessel halted. 'Tommy, how do you see this thing? What happened?'"
quote: "Nxesi adjusted his glasses with a thumb and two fingers. 'She brought work home, she sat here...'"
quote: "He sighed. 'Excuse me, Tommy,' he said, and took it out of his jacket pocket. MBALI."
quote: "'Thank you,' she said without enthusiasm. 'You know I'm on the shooter team?'"
quote: "'I want to know what you think. Could we meet?'"
quote: "He would have to go to Alexa first, and he still had to finish here. He checked his watch."
quote: "Mbali interpreted his hesitation correctly. 'Any time, Benny, I'm at the scene at the moment, in Claremont.'"
quote: "Nxesi looked at the ground with a grin. 'Mbali Kaleni?' he asked."
quote: "The sniper sat in the Chana panel van. Beside him on the floor lay an electric lamp with an extension cord that snaked out of the window to a power point on the wall of the dark garage."
quote: "On his lap was the rifle. Beside him, on the tool chest, a set of cleaning materials was arranged in the aluminium case – the metal rods, brushes, mops, cloths and oil. He worked slowly and surely, not wanting to touch the telescope. He could not afford to take it back to a shooting range to calibrate it again."
quote: "It would be a long shot today. Perhaps the longest of all. That's why he wanted to get it over and done with."
quote: "And it had to happen before midday, before the streets turned into the quiet of a Sunday afternoon."
quote: "Today he would take his time. Stay calm. The first shot yesterday had missed because he hadn't handled the tension well. The ice was broken now. He would shoot better today."
quote: "He checked his watch. Twenty minutes, then he would have to leave."
quote: "'At the time, you could get inside this building easily,' said Warrant Officer Tommy Nxesi. 'Through the parking garage, up the stairs maybe, or in the lift. So he got in and then he knocked on the door. She had finished working, she might have been downstairs. She looked through the peephole. And she knew him. So she opened up. They talked there. Then they began to argue. He became very angry. He stabbed her. He saw she was dead. Then he left.'"
quote: "Griessel asked him where he had found the photographs of Sloet, the ones in the white envelope."
quote: "Nxesi hesitated a second before walking over to the bedside cupboard, on the right-hand side of the bed. There were two drawers, and a little door under them. He pulled open the second drawer. 'Come and see,' he said with barely disguised distaste. Then he stepped back, as though the contents of the drawer were toxic."
quote: "'There's her boyfriend,' said Nxesi. 'The album is underneath.'"
quote: "Giessel said nothing, pulled out the photo album and opened it."
quote: "More photos of Hanneke Sloet, in the same style as the ones he had seen, in a variety of poses, one A4 print per page. Her cleavage was frequently displayed, but there were no other nude pictures. And eight pages were empty."
quote: "'Ewe. Two for the file. And the nude one, because I didn't want her mother to see it.' Very earnest."
quote: "He looked up, saw the warrant officer waiting for his reaction."
quote: "At his car Nxesi asked him to sign for receipt of the apartment keys. Once Griessel had done that, he saw the relief, fleeting, as if the warrant officer was shrugging a weight off his shoulders."
quote: "His astonishment was Griessel's answer. 'Forget it, Tommy, just something the colonel said last night.'"
quote: "Nxesi shook his head. 'All I found was a bunch of capitalists...'"
quote: "Benny phoned Alexa while he was driving and told her he was on his way. She sounded absent and far away, as though it didn't matter, and his heart sank."
quote: "The trouble was that he didn't understand her, though he tried, even if he factored in the damage in her past. That enormous talent."
quote: "The thing was, he'd hoped, vaguely, though he should have known better, that she would consider performing with them. Not permanently, but maybe now and then. Special occasions. But that night, when she sang the first stanzas, he knew they were not in her class."
quote: "Instantly, she had raised their standard, their sound, their ability, suddenly she made them sound good."
quote: "For nearly an hour, one song after the other. Griessel saw the light in her eyes, and the metamorphosis. The homecoming, and the longing in her for what he guessed must be an audience, or real applause, the kind that thundered like the ocean, because that's what fed her talent, that was her right in those moments."
quote: "The same woman who said to him last night, 'They saw through me.'"
quote: "Where was she coming from? Had she no idea how good she was?"
quote: "How should he handle it, if he couldn't understand? What should he say to her?"
quote: "'I looked at the boyfriend for a long time. Roch. But it just wouldn't fit, he was overseas, in any case. There's no one, Captain, I looked at everyone. That's why I say, it's something that we can't put our finger on. A chance encounter, a spur of the moment argument.'"
quote: "But he only partly agreed. There were a few things that bothered him. The total absence of defensive wounds. Where the blood pooled. And the third drawer in the kitchen."
quote: "She had been stabbed from the front. She was face to face with the murderer. Three metres into the apartment. She hadn't fended it off."
quote: "And the contents of the third kitchen drawer showed someone who was not keen on cooking. He suspected that was the sum total of her kitchen utensils. Even if there had been a fourth, much bigger, broader, longer knife, he could not see how a murderer could waltz in, open the drawer and scrabble around until he found the right weapon, while Hanneke Sloet stood patiently waiting near the front door."
quote: "And all that meant that Nxesi was right to suspect the convenient, previously convicted caretaker, Faroek Klein. He would have to check his alibi again."
quote: "Alexa opened the front door for him. She was in her dressing gown, still unkempt. But she was sober."
quote: "Relief washed over him, and the guilt that he had carried inside since yesterday evening. 'I'm so terribly sorry, Alexa, I humiliated you and then I had to go off and work, I...' But by then she had turned away from him, with an odd expression on her face that he could not read."
quote: "'Alexa...' he said. She shook her head, as though she didn't want to hear."
quote: "Her mug was on the table, her chair pushed back. That was where she had been sitting when he arrived."
quote: "Without a word she poured him coffee and sat down at the table. She pushed the milk, sugar and teaspoon holder closer, wrapped her hands around her own coffee mug, her faced hidden behind the blonde hair."
quote: "He sat down, worried now. She had looked like this the first time he saw her, in the sitting room of this house. The morning after her husband's death."
quote: "He wanted to disagree with her, but she lifted a hand and stopped him."
quote: "'Didn't occur to you that that is precisely the problem?'"
quote: "'Christ, Benny, this industry... You don't know what it's like. I'm not strong enough...'"
quote: "She sighed, as though it took a lot of energy to say all that, turned the mug between her fingers. 'So I collect people, Benny. Like Dave Burmeister, my first band leader. And Adam. And now I'm doing the same with you. People who can plaster over the moments of truth, you tell them you're a failure, and they say, no, Alexa, you're the best singer in the world. They feed you the drug when the crowds are not there. It's a vicious circle, a seductive process, not rational or normal or psychologically balanced. Because the world you live in is abnormal. False. Smoke and mirrors and sleight of hand. And if you realise that, if the truth suddenly penetrates through to you one day, then the fear is kindled. Of being caught out. And then you start to drink. Because when you're drunk, it's easier to believe it all—'"
quote: "Then Griessel's cellphone rang and he wished he could ignore it, he didn't want to be interrupted, not now."
quote: "He stood up and walked to the dining room to answer it. 'Hello, Carla.'"
quote: "'Fritz wants to get a tatt, Pappa,' said his daughter in her accusatory I-am-the-older-smarter-sister voice."
quote: "'Pa! Does it matter? What will he look like when he's forty?' As though that were the age of damnation."
quote: "'Since he's been playing for Jack Parow, Pa. I'm worried about him.' The maternal Carla, a new phenomenon since the divorce – she worried about her father and brother."
quote: "'He just phoned me now. He said he's going to a tattoo parlour this week. It's so... suburban...'"
quote: "'I'll talk to him, it's just awkward now...'"
quote: "'Ay. Don't work too hard, anyway, I just thought I'd tell you, Pappa.' Back in her normal, fizzy, exuberant mode. 'Will I see you next week?'"
quote: "'You must let me know where you want to go and eat.'"
quote: "'I will. But not with a kid with a tattoo. Love you, Pappa.'"
quote: "'Love you too,' he said, and then she was gone with a cheerful 'bye', and he stood there for a while to get his thoughts together. He went back to the kitchen, stood in the doorway, a foot in two different worlds."
quote: "Lost in thought he said, 'Fritz wants to get a tattoo.'"
quote: "Alexa Barnard swept the blonde hair out of her face with one hand, and then suddenly she began to laugh. Her head thrown back, the sound deep and surprising, and, so it sounded to Griessel, with a great deal of relief."
quote: "The Chana panel van drove into the parking lot of the Sea Point library, just to the right of the Town Hall. Right to the back, up against the M6 Western Boulevard, reversed it into the last parking spot, so that it could exit quickly and easily."
quote: "Through the gap between the two trees he inspected the Green Point Police Station on the other side of the double highway. A hundred and thirty metres, according to his Google Earth calculations. A long shot for this calibre, for his level of skill. But a greater problem was the high fence around the SAPS building. His only unhindered view of the entrance was through the wide front gate. It narrowed his sights dramatically; gave him very little time to track a target. He would have to wait until a policeman walked towards the door, that instant when he paused to pull it open..."
quote: "Then there was the traffic on the M6. The trajectory was above normal cars, but a bus or a lorry could divert the shot. And through the tiny opening in the side panel of the Chana his field of vision was too small to refine his timing."
quote: "He inspected the area one last time. He was aware of the quickening of his pulse, of his knuckles white on the steering wheel. He was disappointed. He had thought he would be calmer the second time."
quote: "Alexa told Griessel she had heard, through his conversation with Carla, that he had an urgent case."
quote: "With the self-mocking smile of the relapsed alcoholic, she said she had already called Mrs Ellis, her AA sponsor. There was no need to worry, she wouldn't drink again today. He must go to work, he could come around tonight or tomorrow or whenever he had a little time, and tell her all about it. And, please, he mustn't blame himself."
quote: "Would she please phone Lize Beekman and Anton Goosen and apologise on his behalf?"
quote: "It wasn't necessary, she said. They were used to overwrought fans."
quote: "She would. But only if he went back to work now."
quote: "He phoned Mbali, and drove off to meet her at a street café in Greenmarket Square."
quote: "He arrived there before her, and watched the Zulu detective coming towards him through the crowds of tourists. The short, stout body with her 'don't-mess-with-me' attitude. She was, as always, dressed in a black trouser suit. The big black handbag over her shoulder, Beretta 92FS on her hip, the SAPS identity card slung on a tape around her neck for all the world to see. The over-the-top dark glasses. And nowadays a white scarf, to hide the scars."
quote: "He stood up, greeted her, and waited for her to be seated."
quote: "She did so with a sigh, putting her handbag down on the chair beside her. She fiddled inside it, pulled out a thin file, took one sheet of paper out of it, and placed it in front of him."
quote: "'This is for you.' Then she pushed her dark glasses up above her forehead and, frowning, looked around for a waiter."
quote: "He wished for the euphoria of yesterday afternoon, that lightheaded jumble of relief and satisfaction and contentment – he had outmanoeuvred them, he had got away, he had hit back. He had known then that his strategy was masterful, infallible. But now doubts were eating away at him. And the fear of being caught."
quote: "He pressed his cheek against the rifle, looked through the scope."
quote: "I shot the policeman in Claremont yesterday. Today there will be another one. Every day, until you charge the murderer."
quote: "Griessel looked up. Mbali told him General Afrika had forwarded it to both of them that morning, and asked her to take it to him."
quote: "He thanked her, and asked her if she had found anything in Claremont."
quote: "The man raised his eyebrows, glanced at Griessel, who indicated he didn't want anything. Then he left."
quote: "'So we have no real crime scene,' said Mbali. 'And today he is going to shoot again.'"
quote: "Lieutenant Colonel Bevan Dlodlo pulled on the aluminium handle to open the door of the Green Point Police Station."
quote: "At that instant, with a thunderous clap, the glass directly in front of him exploded."
quote: "His whole body jerked in fright, a glass shard stung his forehead. Shouts from inside, the tinkle of glass raining down and shattering on the concrete. His instinct was to duck, to move to the wall, away from the door. His hand reached for the service pistol on his hip."
quote: "With his back to the wall, the pistol in his hand, on his haunches, head turned to the door, he wanted to shout to those inside to find out what was going on. He felt the warm trickle of blood running down his forehead. Then something jerked at his ankle, with so much violence that he fell over onto his left side."
quote: "He looked down in astonishment at his lower leg. He saw his blue police boot in tatters, the blood seeping through it and slowly spreading in a growing pool on the concrete."
quote: "He looked across the parking lot. There was no one."
quote: "With the file open in front of her Mbali tapped her finger on the emails and said, 'I don't get this guy. Am I missing something, is it the culture gap?'"
quote: "That was a good question, one that he had wondered about last night. He shook his head slowly. 'I don't know. Maybe. If he was part of her life, he must have known that it could lead us to him, eventually. So I have my doubts.'"
quote: "'I don't think he means a real communist. It's a...' His English let him down."
quote: "He wasn't sure what that meant. She saw that. 'Like he's using a figure of speech. Maybe he means black people?'"
quote: "'Something like that. As if he doesn't want to sound like a racist.'"
quote: "'But he doesn't mind sounding like a religious nut.'"
quote: "From the expectation on her face he could see she was hoping for more. He thought it over, then asked, 'Nobody heard the shot? Not even the constable?'"
quote: "'Then it's probably a long-range weapon. A rifle, probably a scope. And a silencer. I'll look at silencers, they're scarce, I don't think you can buy them from a shop... Do you know Giel de Villiers? From the armoury?'"
quote: "'He's the one I go to if I have questions about weapons. He's very quiet, but he knows everything. That's what I would do. Talk to Giel.' Realising it was Sunday, Griessel added, 'He lives out in Bothasig. He'll probably be in the book.'"
quote: "'Thank you, Benny.' She got up and picked up her handbag. 'Why do you think they gave me the case?'"
quote: "'I'm new at CATS, I only got back on Friday. I was still unpacking...'"
quote: "'You know how it is, everybody's got too much work...'"
quote: "He wanted to add that she was a good methodical investigator, but with a look of suspicion she said, 'Doesn't make sense.' Then her cellphone started to ring, and she had to scrabble in her big handbag to find it before she could answer."
quote: "The conversation was brief. She made only a few affirmative grunts, then said, 'I'm coming.' Then to Griessel, resigned, 'He's shot another one. The SC, at Green Point.'"
quote: "He had read the case file, he had been to the scene, he knew enough to be able to say that it was nonsense. There was no obvious suspect."
quote: "This was trouble. It fuelled his frustration. He still knew too little. About everything."
quote: "He struggled to find parking, had to cross Bloem Street for a bay in front of the St Paul Primary School. Griessel got out and walked back, between the brightly-painted little houses. Coloured people sat on their porches, their eyes following his progress with a certain wariness. He thought of Mbali back at the street café. Just before she walked away, she'd said, 'Thanks, Benny, for not asking about Amsterdam.' She had a vulnerability about her he had never seen before. And she was subdued this morning, not her old, obstreperous self."
quote: "Now he too was curious about what had happened in Holland."
quote: "Klein's home was a yellow terraced house with white pillars, and a tree that dominated the small front garden. Griessel reached to open the red garden gate. His cellphone rang."
quote: "He paused, saw an unfamiliar number, and answered simply, 'Yes.'"
quote: "'Hey, Benny, it's Vaughn, where are you?' Captain Vaughn Cupido."
quote: "Griessel tried to remember what Colonel Nyathi had said the night before. 'As far as I know, you are just on standby, Vaughn, nobody said I had to phone you.'"
quote: "'I'm still busy with it myself. Listen, I'm standing in front of a...' If he said 'suspect', Cupido would definitely broadcast the news that Griessel had made great progress. '... witness's house, I'll call you as soon as I have something. Thanks, Vaughn, I appreciate your offer.'"
quote: "Griessel ended the call. Cupido was not his favourite detective. He was one of those men who knew everything, and was extremely pleased with the fact that he was a Hawk. Vaughn was with the former Organised Crime Unit, which had been directly incorporated in the DPCI. Cowboys."
quote: "He put his phone away and opened the garden gate."
quote: "She tossed the cascade of straight hair over her shoulder with a gesture of disdain, turned and stalked off, as if he didn't exist."
quote: "Heavier footsteps on the wooden floor, as a man walked into the small hallway. 'Can I help?' Surly."
quote: "Griessel held up his SAPS identity card. Klein glanced at it. He was taller than Griessel, with manicured stubble on his upper lip and chin, the thick black hair combed, a strong face. Early forties. He said, 'What do you want this time?'"
quote: "A woman appeared behind Klein, middle-aged, with the same enchanting heritage of Malay genes as her daughter, the same antipathy on her face. 'Invite him in,' she said, turned and walked away."
quote: "Griessel could see Klein was not in the mood. He stood patiently waiting."
quote: "They were a united front on the sofa, Klein in the middle, the wife and two teenage daughters beside him."
quote: "Griessel sat opposite, in an easy chair, his notebook in hand. He didn't get the chance to ask a question, before the wife began, 'I am Noor, this is Laila, and this is Asmida. I am Faroek's second wife, he is the stepfather of my children. You can ask them, he is a good stepfather. Faroek's first wife was a bad apple. He caught her sleeping around, and not only once. When he couldn't stand it any more, he smacked her, and she laid a complaint and they made a case. He pleaded guilty, he got a suspended sentence, he divorced her. Last year she got married for the fourth time.' Everything said with a factual tone, without judgement."
quote: "The two daughters glared. Klein sat there with a hidden, satisfied smile, encircled by three pretty women."
quote: "Griessel nodded, drew a breath to say something, but she didn't give him a chance."
quote: "'The evening the Sloet woman was murdered, Faroek was here at home. With all three of us. We ate at seven o'clock, like we do every night, and then the girls sat in the kitchen doing homework, and Faroek and I watched TV. These two went to bed around ten, and Faroek and I at about half past ten, because we are both gainfully employed and we take our responsibilities seriously. We love each other very much. We aren't white, we aren't rich, but we have our values. And they do not include lying if any one of us commits murder. Is there anything else you would like to know?'"
quote: "He closed his notebook. There was one question remaining, but he suspected the answer would not come without more chastisement. 'Mr Klein, are you... communist in your politics?'"
quote: "The tall, beautiful woman stood up. 'We are about to have Sunday lunch, would you like to join us?'"
quote: "He remembered the dream he had had repeatedly a month or so ago, four nights in a row. He was playing with Roes, he couldn't get the notes of the bass guitar to keep to the tempo, he buggered into the wrong key, and the band members gave him sidelong glances with questioning, worried faces."
quote: "That's how he'd felt, since yesterday. Out of rhythm with the world. Out of tune."
quote: "On the other hand, in the last ten years had he ever felt any other way?"
quote: "In his kitchen he shoved the chicken and broccoli in cheese sauce into the microwave and phoned Mbali."
quote: "'It's chaos, Benny, they brought in Forensics before I could call the PCSI task team. The whole station trampled my crime scene to help the SC. I had to interview him in the ambulance."
quote: "'He's not sure where the shot came from, maybe from the tennis courts. But we are talking to the players, and they didn't see or hear anything.'"
quote: "'In the ankle. But there was another shot, Benny. He hit the door first, the entrance door, we have two bullets to search for. It might help.'"
quote: "At his breakfast counter he ate the chicken straight out of the container, without pleasure. He sat and stared at his mountain bike – it hadn't moved in two weeks. There wasn't enough time in the morning to ride – he had to get up earlier to handle the traffic all the way to the DPCI offices in Bellville. If they would only finish building the damn flyovers on the N5. But the World Cup was over now, everything was at a standstill again."
quote: "The solution was to move, to find himself a flat in the northern suburbs. He didn't want to. He liked living under the mountain, near the city and the Gardens Centre. And the distance from Anna, from his old problems and trouble. Bellville was full of temptation, all his old drinking spots, his old drinking buddies..."
quote: "But he wasn't getting to ride his bike now."
quote: "He got up, went and lay down on the couch, hands on his chest. He felt the fatigue of too little sleep, maybe he should take a nap, half an hour, to clear his head."
quote: "He pulled his notebook closer, found the telephone numbers and wrote them down."
quote: "Gabriélle Villette lived alone in a town house, in the back of the Avenues complex in Sea Point, away from the noise of High Level Road. She was barefoot, her body as small and skinny as a child. Her face was narrow beneath her short blonde hair. He guessed she was just under thirty. Her mouth was a stingy line, so her warmth surprised him. Griessel apologised for the hour and the short notice. She said, 'I don't sleep during the day, please come in,' with a smile that revealed two prominent eye teeth, reminding him vaguely of a vampire. 'I saw the piece in the newspaper this morning.'"
quote: "The sitting room was a cheerful blue and yellow. There was a series of framed colour photos of fruit on the wall, very close-up shots of a glowing green bunch of grapes, a red apple, a yellow pear, an enamel bucket full of bright orange apricots. She saw him looking. 'It's my hobby,' she said, nothing more, and he wondered if she meant the fruit or the photography. 'Please sit,' she encouraged him, and made herself comfortable on the light blue-grey sofa. Her eyes were almost the same shade."
quote: "He sat in a pale yellow chair, took out his notebook. He saw her cross her legs and look at him expectantly."
quote: "'I'm trying to find out who Hanneke Sloet was,' he said."
quote: "Again the nod, as though she was considering the words and consenting, the eyes cast down. He guessed it was a usual mannerism of hers."
quote: "'I liked her,' she said, this time more quickly, without the nod and the thoughtful pause."
quote: "He didn't react, waited for her to say more."
quote: "The silence stretched, she folded her hands together. He knew this reaction, piety for the dead. He waited."
quote: "'I admired her,' the voice was a bit quieter, eyes on the floor. 'She was pretty and clever. And hard working. So focused. She put in a lot of hours. She was precise, in everything. Organised. Always on time. Always well groomed. And fair.' Gabby Villette looked up at him, as if she were grateful that it occurred to her, 'She treated me very fairly.'"
quote: "Not much more than was in the file. He asked what Hanneke Sloet's typical day looked like. Before Villette answered, the hesitation was back, the thorough consideration, the slow nod. Then she said you must differentiate between last year, and January. Sloet probably moved to the city because she knew her pace was going to burn her out. While she lived in Stellenbosch, she must have got up at half past four to get to the gym by a quarter to six, the Virgin Active in Jetty Street. She exercised until a quarter to seven, and she was at the office every weekday at a quarter past."
quote: "'That was where she did her dictation. On the exercise bike. I could hear it, on the recorder.'"
quote: "He asked about the rest of the day. She said Sloet would prepare until half past eight, planned the day with Villette until nine, when the meetings began. There were a lot of meetings in the team environment at Silbersteins. In the afternoon, between one and three, she answered calls and emails, then worked on contracts and reports, mostly until eight o'clock at night. Villette knew because she never went home before her boss. Sometimes there were business lunches and evening cocktail parties, there were short business trips especially to Gauteng, there were two days in winter that Villette could remember when Hanneke Sloet phoned in with a hoarse, nasal voice to say she was as sick as a dog, in bed with flu and a lot of medicine. And the operation, last year, she was off for a week..."
quote: "The subtle intonation of 'the operation' made him ask, 'What operation?'"
quote: "He knew it was the right time for the question. 'Did everyone like her?'"
quote: "Mbali had to push through the bystanders to walk out of the gate of Green Point Station. They stood just outside the circle of yellow crime-scene tape that was stretched around the front door, complainants who wanted to enter, the curious, everyone was watching Thick and Thin of Forensics as they sifted through the glass shards."
quote: "She went and stood in the gateway, drew an imaginary bead for the shot, and walked along it. Every now and then she would stop, look back, see how the opening narrowed as the distance increased."
quote: "She walked across the grey, open space beside the tennis courts, up to the Western Boulevard. To stop here, to aim, shoot. Two shots? Unlikely."
quote: "She waited for an opening in the traffic, trotted across the tar to the island, then over to the other side. Her handbag swung from the shoulder strap so that she had to steady it with her hand."
quote: "A little out of breath she looked back at the gate, now seeming impossibly small."
quote: "Then she looked at the possibilities on this side of the double highway – the open space to the left, the bowls club behind it. Then to the right, the brick and rail fence of the Town Hall. On top of it was an electrified wire. Nobody could climb over that."
quote: "She stood there for a long time, looking and thinking. And eventually made her deductions."
quote: "Griessel sat and waited until Gabby Villette filled the silence. 'You have to understand the context,' she said. 'Silbersteins is... All the directors are men, ninety per cent of the associates too. And all the PAs are women. Hanneke was somewhere in the middle...' She looked up, the eye teeth suddenly displayed in an apologetic grin. 'I'm not used to talking about my work with outsiders. That's the problem with Silbersteins, it becomes your world, your whole life...'"
quote: "She folded her arms. 'It's such an... intense place, the hours, the pace, the pressure, money drives everyone, chargeable hours...'"
quote: "She folded her arms again and looked at the window."
quote: "The 'no' came too quickly, and Villette knew it. 'I don't know. I really don't.'"
quote: "He knew she was leading him, wanting him to ask more. 'And before that?'"
quote: "'That was when she was still an articled clerk. A long time ago. 2002? She worked in Corporate and Commercial Litigation. The director was Werner Gelderbloem. He was her sort of mentor, he was over fifty by then. A good-looking man. And he's married... in any case, there was talk of... You know...'"
quote: "'Apparently they would still be talking in his office when his PA went home in the evening. And he took her along for a case in Pretoria, and when his PA phoned the hotel one morning, she heard Hanneke's voice in the room... Or she thought it was Hanneke's voice.'"
quote: "He nodded, trying to hide his disappointment. 'Did you know her former friend...' he referred to his notes, 'Egan Roch?'"
quote: "'I met him. Twice. He came to the office one day, just after I started with Hanneke. And then at the Christmas party, year before last.' As an afterthought, 'They suited each other.'"
quote: "'Two good-looking people. And the way he had with her... I think he understood her. He is... very comfortable with himself.'"
quote: "In his car he called Hannes Pruis, Silberstein Director. The cellphone switched over to voicemail. He left a message, then typed in Egan Roch's number. The man answered, the signal was poor, he could hear the hum of a moving vehicle. Griessel explained the situation. Roch said he was on the other side of Citrusdal, he would only be home after seven, could they meet tomorrow?"
quote: "Benny agreed, made an appointment for ten o'clock, time for him to get to where Roch worked, on a wine farm outside Stellenbosch. Then he rang off and drove to the SAPS station in Green Point, which was nearby. He had to park in front of the small supermarket, because the gate was cordoned off. He got out and went in search of Mbali."
quote: "'No sense of tradition. That's the trouble with these elite units.'"
quote: "'Benny is the Chanting Goshawk,' said Arnold. 'I hear you've got a band...'"
quote: "'Mbali,' said Griessel, because it was no use getting angry with them."
quote: "'Flew off,' said Jimmy. 'Back to the Claremont crime scene.'"
quote: "'I'm a hawk, not a rat,' said Griessel, and walked towards the gate."
quote: "At seven minutes to four the sniper sent the email, but the pressure and uncertainty deprived him of any sense of pleasure. His nerves drove him up from the computer. He tugged open the drawer, took out the Chana's keys, walked anxiously to the kitchen and opened the access door to the garage. Then he stopped, conscious of his feverish haste."
quote: "One mistake. That's all it would take. He would have to calm down. He would have to think hard about what he wanted to do next. Every minute on the road in the Chana was a risk."
quote: "He had no choice. He would have to drive. Go run the test."
quote: "He closed the door slowly behind him, climbed into the vehicle. Looked in the back. Everything in its place."
quote: "He turned on the engine. Pressed the button of the remote to open the door of the garage."
quote: "He drove, out on the R7, towards Melkbosstrand, then along the M19 east, to where the old Atlantis road turned off. He looked for a place, found one five kilometres further – a gravel road to the left, across a railway line. He turned off, saw a possible target, more or less a hundred metres away. A blue gum tree, thick trunk, the bark peeling off in strips."
quote: "He parked, switched off the engine. He felt the prickle of nerves in his neck, the tension in his guts, the bottled-up worry. Why couldn't he get rid of it?"
quote: "He waited. Looked. Listened. Eventually he got in the back, unhooked the fabric curtain, got the gun, and slid open the side panel."
quote: "It wasn't the rifle. The problem lay with him."
quote: "The urge to do something, to build up momentum, to utilise the time, took Griessel back to Sloet's apartment. He had no other immediate options, he would have to search the place anyway, thoroughly and meticulously, sooner or later. And there was the undefined question about the place, which since his visit to Gabby Villette, was lurking in the back of his mind."
quote: "In the lift, the security woman asked, 'When will you be finished?'"
quote: "In the apartment he shut the front door behind him, then pulled at it. It had locked automatically. He leaned back against the door."
quote: "Before he left Villette, he had asked her who Sloet would trust with her spare key. She nodded and thought it over and shook her head. 'I don't know... I'll think about it,' she promised."
quote: "He turned around, studied the security chain. There was absolutely no damage to it."
quote: "Had someone stolen the spare keys? Someone she didn't know? Maybe she sometimes forgot to hook the chain or close the bolt, because she could use the peephole?"
quote: "He began his search upstairs, in the second bedroom, already used to the way it felt, the odd mix of vague voyeurism and excitement. Using a knife he fetched from the kitchen, he carefully slit open every cardboard box, unpacked the contents one by one, and then back again."
quote: "Textbooks, probably from her student days. African Customary Law, Private Law, Roman Law, Criminal Law, Public Law, Interpretation of Law, Law of Criminal Procedure, Competition Law, Insurance Law, Intellectual Property Law, Internet Law."
quote: "So much Law. No wonder the courts and the jails were chock-full. No wonder the police couldn't keep up."
quote: "A stack of coffee-table books about wine and art and interior decorating, a couple of Afrikaans novels by Marita van der Vyver, Etienne van Heerden and André P. Brink, a diverse collection of English paperbacks by, among others, Jodi Picoult, Anne Tyler and John Grisham."
quote: "Memorabilia. Old programmes and tickets to concerts and plays, postcards, greetings cards of congratulations for birthdays, graduation, promotion. Used plane tickets and brochures for trips to Europe and the USA, cheap jewellery, a chunky old cellphone. Decorative hair combs and grips, two scratched pairs of sunglasses, iPod cables, loose photos of groups of people."
quote: "Six photograph albums and a smaller box of letters. He put them to one side. The other boxes were filled with clothes and shoes. Lots of shoes."
quote: "And he asked, 'What for, Doc?' because he already knew where it had begun, he could remember the first time, crystal-clear, although it was fourteen years ago. The sunny Saturday morning, the five-year-old child in the middle of the park at Rylands, her white socks and white sandals, the blue ribbons in her ponytails, the heart-rending beauty of her delicate features. The red and purple bruises of the rape and strangulation, the dried semen, the tender little hand gripping a Wilson's toffee wrapping like a last treasure."
quote: "It was his fourth murder that week, an impossible time. Too few people, too little sleep, too much work. They all suffered from post-traumatic stress, but nobody knew. That morning, he saw her expression at her moment of death and he heard the primitive scream, and he knew, everyone screams when they die, everyone holds on to life terribly tightly, and when someone loosens their fingers, they fall and cry out in terror. Of the end."
quote: "Of course he drank before that – controllably, four, five times a week, in the afternoon with the guys. But after that it got out of control. Alcohol was the only thing that could keep all the noises and images out of his head, the all-consuming fear that it could happen to his family too, to Anna and Carla and Fritz."
quote: "Systematically, he built up the jigsaw puzzle of her life. The phantom pieces from the albums and letters were not enough to form a clear image, so he had to fill the gaps with his imagination. The story was ordinary, mostly typical Afrikaner middle class. It began in Ladybrand in the Free State in the mid-seventies. Willem Sloet, co-op clerk, tall and thin and slightly stooped; the hairline already beginning to recede in the face of more than thirty summers, the little moustache uncertain, like an experiment – on some of the photos he had the intimidated expression of a man who had married above his station and had, slowly, begun to realise the consequences. His wife, Marna, with her pleasant face, her smile frequently determined and brave. And the only child, Hanneke, lucky to have inherited from the start the best combination of her parents' features."
quote: "In the early eighties there was a move to Paarl, apparently a better position for Willem, because the old reddish-brown Ford Escort in the holiday photos is replaced by a white Volkswagen Passat station wagon. Hanneke grows into a lanky schoolgirl, her thick hair in a plait, the slight gap between her front teeth displayed without embarrassment in every smile, cute, plucky and carefree."
quote: "He looked through the letters. There were two from boys, raw and clumsy declarations of teenage love and desire, warm letters of friendship from other girls, their admiration shining through. And a series written by mother Marna, initially just best wishes for her daughter's achievements in school – the encouragement and aspiration delicately camouflaged. Later, at university and during Hanneke Sloet's backpacking year in Europe, her mother's wistfulness over her own lost opportunities, her disappointment in her husband, and her ambitions for her daughter glimmered through ever more strongly."
quote: "The letters ended there, at the end of 2000, just before Hanneke Sloet started at Silberstein Lamarque. The glued and captioned snapshots too. In the back of the last album was a sheaf of loose photographs of Sloet and someone whom Griessel assumed must be Egan Roch. The man was tall, with powerful shoulders and arms, and abundant self-confidence. They were, in the words of Gabriélle Villette, 'two good-looking people'. The photographs showed they had frequently walked in the mountains, had visited a wine farm, sailed in Table Bay, socialised, and been to New York together at least once."
quote: "Loose photographs, thought Captain Benny Griessel. As though Hanneke Sloet didn't want to commit this relationship to permanent record."
quote: "He thought it all over while he searched the master bedroom meticulously. He tried all the parts of Villette's revelations for fit and what he could glean from the albums and letters."
quote: "The thing was, he had often seen the dangers of extreme ambition. In women, the consuming desire to rise in social stature, to keep up with neighbours and colleagues, sometimes led to fraud and theft from the employer, or the smuggling of drugs on planes."
quote: "But Sloet had followed another route, honourable and acceptable. Hard, disciplined work at school and university, later at Silbersteins. The alleged affair with the older, married man early in her career could as easily be attributed to compensation for a weak father figure as to the desire for advancement."
quote: "He could find nothing. No spare key, no new insights or clues."
quote: "In the sitting room, out of desperation, he examined the telescope and decided it was ornamental, the magnification unimpressive, the interesting peeping tom possibilities outside the window just too far away."
quote: "Griessel walked to the door, stopping in frustration and indecision beside the pool of dry blood. He understood why Nxesi's investigation had yielded nothing, because there were only shadows of possibilities, vague spectres that evaporated when you looked more closely. Communists? The shooter had the wrong end of the stick – there were no communists in her life, just a Big Boy vibrator in the bedside cupboard. A whole day wasted and he had made no progress, and tomorrow the bastard would blow another policeman's leg away."
quote: "Before he could consider the meaning of this, his cellphone rang – the DPCI office number."
quote: "'Benny, can you come down here?' asked Brigadier Manie, and Griessel knew this spelled trouble."
quote: "He said he was in the city, he could be there in fifteen minutes. He hastily locked the apartment, waited impatiently for the lift, jogged to the BMW and drove with sirens and lights flashing through the sparse Sunday traffic. It took him twenty minutes anyway, because Durban Road was, as usual, a traffic light mess."
quote: "He found them in the brigadier's office. Manie, Nyathi, du Preez, Mbali Kaleni, and Cloete, the liaison officer. No John Afrika."
quote: "'The sniper?' Griessel asked, and sat down in a vacant chair."
quote: "'Yes. And now there are two stories. One about how he is going to shoot policemen until the Sloet case is solved, the other about how the SAPS tried to keep it quiet.'"
quote: "'Three,' said Cloete. 'They are asking if we only reopened the Sloet case because someone was shooting at us.'"
quote: "Manie shoved the email towards Griessel. 'How are you getting on, Benny?'"
quote: "'Badly, Brigadier,' he answered, because he had learned to stick to the truth. It didn't help to say what your boss wanted to hear."
quote: "Manie's granite face revealed nothing. He merely nodded, as if it was what he had expected."
quote: "'He doesn't say anything about a communist,' Griessel said."
quote: "'He was in a hurry. Or he's feeling the pressure.'"
quote: "'The spelling. He made a lot of mistakes this time,' said Griessel. The brigadier's phone rang on his desk. 'The pressure,' said Manie, 'is on us. That is the general. Calling from Pretoria.'"
quote: "From where he sat, Griessel could hear the lieutenant general from Pretoria's agitation, his shrill, angry tone, tinny, like an enraged electronic insect."
quote: "He listened to Brigadier Manie's stoic 'Yes, General,' and 'No, General, we will formulate and release a statement, General.' He looked at Nyathi, sitting with his chin in his hands, deeply worried, and Colonel Werner du Preez of CATS, twirling his cigarette lighter around and around in his fingers. At Cloete, always so astonishingly patient, but the nicotine stains on his fingers and dark rings under his eyes testified that it came at a price. He was the one between the devil of the media and the deep blue sea of the SAPS. And Mbali Kaleni, with her scowl and body language, which said she had no time for this tripe, they had work to do. He felt anger stirring inside. Why were the press and the top management always at it? Why the extra pressure, as if this job wasn't hard enough already."
quote: "Griessel's phone rang loudly in the room, which had been quiet for a second. He quickly rejected the call, turned it off."
quote: "When Manie eventually returned to the table, and he and Cloete and Nyathi planned the press release word for word, Griessel thought it was a good thing he had drunk away his career prospects. He wouldn't want to be a boss, he couldn't play this game. He would tell the press, you sit and wait like vultures for us to mess up, so you can make a hysterical fuss about it. But where are you when we do something right? When a murderer or a robber or a rapist is found guilty, where's the piece about 'thanks to the good work of the SAPS'? Why do you think the jails are full? Because the bastards turn themselves in? So fuck you all, write what you want."
quote: "When they at last began to discuss the case, Mbali said firmly and confidently, 'He is shooting from a car.'"
quote: "She could see the men were sceptical. 'There is no other explanation. At Green Point the only secluded vantage point is from the Civic Centre across the road, where everything is locked. I went back to Claremont to look at the scene again, and it is the only thing that makes sense. That parking area, it faces a quiet little street.'"
quote: "'A car is very visible,' said Colonel Nyathi, still not convinced."
quote: "'I know. But do you remember the Beltway Sniper in America, in 2002? Two men who shot people from a car?'"
quote: "Those were Griessel's drunken years, he didn't remember that."
quote: "'Yes,' said Manie, with growing understanding. 'In Washington DC. Didn't they take out the back seat so they could lie flat? Made a hole in the boot...?'"
quote: "'A mobile crime scene,' said Werner du Preez. 'You take all the evidence with you.'"
quote: "'Yes. That's how they shot thirteen people before they were caught. I Googled the case just now. One of the big problems for law enforcement was that nobody notices a car. There are so many of them, all the time. And they thought it was a van, they ended up looking at the wrong sort of car.'"
quote: "'You think our shooter isn't working alone?' asked Nyathi."
quote: "'It is a possibility. One to watch the road, while the other one does the shooting.'"
quote: "'I don't know,' said Griessel, and pointed at the email. 'This fellow... All his letters, it's just, \"I, I, I\".'"
quote: "'You know how the Yanks caught the buggers, in the end?' Manie asked, gloomily, and then answered his own question, 'By accident.'"
quote: "'Yes, sir,' said Mbali, 'and there are a lot of similarities. The Beltway Sniper was a religious nut, he sent letters to the police and the media. But it's how my case is different that is important. The Beltway Sniper shot members of the public at random, no real motive, despite the theories. His letters were weird, really crazy. Our guy specifically shoots policemen at police stations. It narrows things down in a geographical sense. His letters are much more specific and coherent. And he's got a thing about the Sloet murder. There must be motive in there somewhere.'"
quote: "'Why has he dropped the issue about the communists?' asked Griessel. 'In the emails to the papers?'"
quote: "'Brigadier, this man is not a moron. He must have known the media would be interested in communists. But he said nothing.'"
quote: "'Because the \"communists\" are a crock of... rubbish. Like Nxesi says, in Sloet's world there are only capitalists. I think it's a smokescreen. I just don't know why.'"
quote: "'The big question is, did he know Sloet?' said Nyathi."
quote: "Nobody wanted to venture an answer. With fanatics you never knew."
quote: "'I think we have to deploy people around police stations,' said Mbali. 'They must start looking for a car.'"
quote: "Griessel listened to his cellphone messages in his office. The first one was from Hannes Pruis, the director of Silberstein Lamarque. 'Captain, I only received your message now. Can we talk tomorrow? I will be at the office from seven.'"
quote: "The second was from Alexa. Just a tentative, 'Hello,' a short moment of silence, and then the click of a call cut short."
quote: "Griessel felt unease stirring. He called her number. It rang for a long time. She didn't answer."
quote: "'I won't drink again today,' she had said when he had left, in the late morning."
quote: "Hastily he looked up Cupido's number and called, because Brigadier Manie had said to him emphatically, 'Benny, people are queueing up to help. Use them.'"
quote: "'Thought you would never call,' Cupido answered with barely concealed reproach, like a sulky teenager. Which reminded Griessel of Fritz's tattooing plans."
quote: "'Vaughn, I've just come out of a meeting with Manie.'"
quote: "'I'll leave the files on your desk. See if you can spot anything. Tomorrow at ten we are talking to her former boyfriend, Roch. I'll come by around half past nine tomorrow, if you want to come along.'"
quote: "He said goodbye and rang off, then took out the white envelope with the risqué photographs. Tomorrow morning he wanted to talk to Anni de Waal, the photographer in De Waterkant Village, before they drove to Stellenbosch. He knew Cupido would have something clever to say about the photos, and he wasn't in the mood for that at all."
quote: "It was nearly half past nine when he drove back to the city. First he prepared for his conversation with Fritz, making sure not to step into traps like, 'Where are you?' or, 'What are you doing?', because what came next would be, 'Don't you trust me, Pa?'"
quote: "'OK, so Carla told you,' were Fritz's opening words. 'Told me what?'"
quote: "'Pa, I'm eighteen, I can get a tatt if I want to. It's a free country.'"
quote: "'That's not what you want to talk about. You never phone on a Sunday night at this time.'"
quote: "Griessel gave up. 'What does your mother say about the tatt?'"
quote: "'Carla hasn't told Ma about it yet, but it's only a matter of time. Supposed to be a varsity student, but she's still so childish.'"
quote: "'It's a big step, Fritz. To get a tattoo.'"
quote: "'Pa, it's a small tattoo on my arm. My shoulder.'"
quote: "'You were born in Panorama Medi-Clinic and you grew up in Brackenfell.'"
quote: "'Parow is where you grew up, Pa. It's part of my working-class heritage.'"
quote: "Griessel sighed. He suspected 'Brackenfell Brak' was a tad too long for a skinny teenage shoulder, which was why Fritz was suddenly taking his 'heritage' from his father's origins – and the contrived name of Jack Parow. And the 'working class' was pure hip hop. 'Just do me one favour,' he said."
quote: "'I won't say a word.' He and Anna couldn't talk about anything without arguing anyway. She would blame him for this too."
quote: "When he turned the handle of Alexa's front door and found it unlocked, he knew."
quote: "He found her in the sitting room. She was slumped in the big easy chair, snoring softly. An empty glass lay on the carpet, a bottle of gin stood on the table, three-quarters empty. The ashtray was overflowing."
quote: "He picked up the bottle first and emptied it down the kitchen sink. That smell in his nostrils... Gin had never been his poison, but the desire for what it could do moved like a paralysing wave through him, so that he just stood there. His brain said, Fetch a glass, just pour a little one."
quote: "He went up to her room. The bed was unmade. He pulled the sheets straight, readied it for her. Went back down to the sitting room. Woke her up, with a great deal of difficulty. She was very drunk, mumbling incoherent words, her body as limp as a rag doll when he tried to get her to stand. She smelled of drink, sweat and cigarettes. They struggled up the stairs for the second night in a row. At last he laid her on the bed."
quote: "'Where were...?' she said, forming the words with effort, her eyes already closed."
quote: "Her eyes slowly opened. 'You... stay... please,' she said, still struggling with the 's' sounds."
quote: "At a quarter to six in the morning he put the coffee cup on her bedside table, sat down next to her and said her name, over and over, louder and louder, until she began to stir, and eventually opened her eyes."
quote: "She looked terrible, her skin pale and sallow, with red blotches, eyes bloodshot. There was a white trail of dried saliva down her chin. She was disorientated at first, said, 'What?' and struggled to sit up."
quote: "She shifted upright against the pillows, as the present slowly penetrated."
quote: "'You can't see me like this,' she said, and covered her face with her hands."
quote: "'I don't want you to see me like this,' she said."
quote: "'I don't want you to throw it all away, Alexa. Not now.'"
quote: "She didn't reply, still hid her face behind her hands."
quote: "She raised her knees, put her arms around them, and dropped her head behind them."
quote: "One hand moved away from her knees, a finger pointed at the dressing table."
quote: "He got up, pulled open the drawer. Underwear. He put his hand in, felt around, found it. More gin."
quote: "He sat down with her again, the bottle in his hands. 'You bought it at a hotel.' The seal was broken."
quote: "That was the place she went to drink, in the past. She had told him."
quote: "'I'm going to my flat now to wash and eat. I'll pick you up at seven.'"
quote: "'Where are we going?' she asked, with fear in her voice."
quote: "'I have to go to work. you'll have to come along until I can make another plan.'"
quote: "He knew it wouldn't help to argue. He stood up. 'Please, Alexa. Just be ready at seven.' Then he walked out."
quote: "At three minutes past seven he knocked on the front door of her house. She opened. She had repaired the damage reasonably well. She was wearing a grey skirt and jacket, with a white blouse. Her face was made up, her hair clean and neat. Only her eyes betrayed the drinking."
quote: "'I'm the last one who could be angry with you. Come on, please.'"
quote: "'Benny, you can't look after me. I won't drink. Not today. I'm rehearsing this afternoon.'"
quote: "When they were on the road she said again, 'You can't look after me.'"
quote: "Her head drooped. 'Yes. My face is on the poster.'"
quote: "Griessel reached over to the back seat, picked up the white envelope and handed it to her. 'Look at that, please.'"
quote: "'Her name is Hanneke Sloet. She was murdered in her flat on the eighteenth of January. Just over there.' He pointed down at the city."
quote: "More sexy than beautiful, but he didn't say that. He knew men and women didn't think the same about beauty. 'She was a corporate lawyer, and she hadn't been in a steady relationship for over a year. Last year in April she had her breasts enlarged. These photos were taken then. Why do you think she did it?'"
quote: "She studied each photo carefully while he drove through the heavy traffic in Buitengracht. Eventually she said, 'It's a celebration of her beauty. Her new assets. Her sexuality.'"
quote: "'Why not? You're lovely...' Griessel couldn't help it, he dropped his eyes fleetingly to her bosom, '... and all.'"
quote: "'I am forty-six. I'm a lush.' But by her curt laugh he could tell that she liked it."
quote: "'She was thirty-three,' he said. 'Why didn't you do that in your thirties?'"
quote: "'I suppose not... It takes a certain kind of personality.'"
quote: "She grasped it at last. 'Aha. You're consulting me.'"
quote: "'I'll have to think about it,' she said, pleased."
quote: "Alexa waited for him in a coffee shop on the corner of Long and Riebeeck Street while he asked at the reception in Silberstein Lamarque House to see Hannes Pruis."
quote: "His office was on the twelfth floor, spacious and quietly luxurious, like the building. Pruis was short and strong, the thick black hair expensively cut. He was maybe fifty, full of bubbling joviality. There was a little diamond in each of the cufflinks in his snow-white shirtsleeves. The small, rectangular glasses were the same shade as his silver temples."
quote: "'Captain, have a seat,' he said in a melodious courtroom voice. 'Coffee? Sugar and milk?'"
quote: "Griessel said, 'Please', and Pruis ordered over the intercom. Then he continued, 'I see you are in the media firing line again, somewhat undeserved. I must say I was most impressed with the first investigation. The man... can't remember his name... Nxesi, thank you, Nxesi, thorough fellow, very thorough. I assume you studied my statement? It was an enormous shock to us all, enormous. Hanneke, what a fantastic person, such a terribly huge loss. And so senseless. We still can't explain it. And now the man who is shooting your people over her case, have you any idea...?' The door opened, a pretty woman with long black hair brought in the tray, put it down in front of them."
quote: "'Please, help yourself,' said Pruis. 'Thank you, Natalie.' She nodded and smiled, went out again. Pruis remained standing, one hand on the desk. 'Have you any idea who is shooting at you?'"
quote: "'I hoped you would be able to help us,' said Benny and took out his notebook."
quote: "'No, dear God, Captain, not the faintest idea. I mean, the whole thing was inexplicable from the start, there is nobody who would want to harm Hanneke.'"
quote: "'Now, you have to be careful...' Pruis raised a warning finger."
quote: "'The source says it was Werner Gelderbloem. Did you know about it?'"
quote: "That stopped Pruis for a second. Then he sat down in the high leather chair and folded his arms across his chest. 'Yes, I knew about it,' he said stiffly, 'but it's old news. It was a long time ago. Eight, nine years ago.'"
quote: "The jovial mood had evaporated. The lawyer leaned forward, pointed his finger at Griessel. 'You're poking your nose into this because you have nothing else, that's the problem. Let me tell you now, it's old potatoes, it only went on for a month or two. These things happen. I'm sure you've also had a bit on the side.'"
quote: "Pruis leaned back in his chair. 'Yes, I'm sure.' He sighed, reconsidered his attitude. 'Listen, I'm probably a little sensitive about this, but Werner Gelderbloem... he's retiring in two years... I mean, Captain, Hanneke was a desirable woman. At a certain age... You realise you're getting old, you've been with the same woman for thirty years, call it a mid-life crisis, here is this smart, pretty young thing who admires you... I mean, which of us wouldn't be tempted? He made a mistake. Nearly nine years ago. He ended it. We transferred her from Corporate Litigation to Commercial Law, and it died a silent death. If there was the slightest chance that it had anything to do with her murder...'"
quote: "He was protesting too much, thought Griessel. 'Mr Pruis, we all have behaviour patterns. We do the same thing over and over. If she had an affair at work once, the chances are good...'"
quote: "Is that why he was so defensive? Griessel nodded, opened his notebook on a new page. 'I will have to ask about the deal she was working on...'"
quote: "The gear changes were visible on Pruis's face. 'Communists?'"
quote: "The lawyer pondered, and then to Griessel's astonishment said, 'Maybe one or two. Why?'"
quote: "'Captain, it's a BEE transaction, and I can't tell you the political affiliation of all the parties involved. There surely are some who are members of the South African Communist Party. Or were. You know, the cadres, the alliances...'"
quote: "Realisation came to him slowly, all the connotations, the implications, the link to the sniper's emails. Griessel's heart sank. 'Mr Pruis, can you explain the whole transaction to me. In layman's terms.'"
quote: "'Captain, there are no layman's terms for this sort of transaction. It's complicated. But it remains a typical BEE transaction, there is one every month or two. Where is the connection to Hanneke Sloet's death?'"
quote: "Pruis looked at his watch and shook his head in irritation. 'Ingcebo Resources Limited is the BEE company. Majority of black shareholders, seven black people on the board of directors, some of them were formerly in government. Ingcebo is borrowing a fraction over four billion rand and using it to buy a fifteen per cent share in Gariep Minerals Limited. Because it's very risky to buy a single share with borrowed money, Ingcebo's financiers have to reduce their risk by structuring it as a five-year convertible loan.'"
quote: "Griessel raised his hand. 'Mr Pruis, I need to understand that.'"
quote: "'I told you, it's complicated – that's why there are so many legal professionals involved.' He sighed heavily. 'Basically it comes down to Gariep Minerals selling a fifteen per cent shareholding to Ingcebo, risk free. Ingcebo still has to finance the amount through banks and other investors, but Gariep's support makes it possible. The whole thing is structured in such a way that... Are you sure you want to know all this?'"
quote: "Pruis pulled open a drawer, took out an expensive leather-bound writing pad. He opened it, pushed it closer to Griessel and drew a circle with a fountain pen on the paper. 'Here is Ingcebo Resources Limited, the BEE mother company. OK?'"
quote: "Pruis drew another circle beside it. 'This is Gariep Minerals. It's a mining company, nearly a hundred years old, in white ownership. They are mostly in gold, platinum, aluminium. They are a local entity, but operate internationally. They have mines here, in Canada, Australia.'"
quote: "Pruis drew a line from Ingcebo Resources Limited, connected it to a smaller circle. 'This is Ingcebo Bauxite. It belongs to Ingcebo Resources Limited. A full subsidiary. In other words, Ingcebo Resources Limited owns Ingcebo Bauxite. You understand?'"
quote: "'Now, Ingcebo Bauxite, the subsidiary, lends four billion rand to Gariep Minerals, the white company, for five years. If Gariep's share price falls over the period, they have to repay the loan with interest, or simply issue the shares to Ingcebo. Because the shares are worth more than the bank loan, Ingcebo can repay the banks in full and retain the balance as profit or an unencumbered share in Gariep.'"
quote: "Griessel realised he wasn't going to get his head around everything. 'The communists are with Ingcebo?'"
quote: "'No. I mean, she must have met them briefly, somewhere at one of the meetings. But there was no contact other than that. Remember, we work for SA Merchant Bank, not for Ingcebo.'"
quote: "Griessel put his notebook down on the table. 'Mr Pruis, can you please give me the names of the Ingcebo people?'"
quote: "Alexa was sitting reading the newspaper. Griessel went up to her table and said, 'We must go.'"
quote: "She tapped a finger on the newspaper and looked up at him. 'Is it this Sloet case you're investigating?'"
quote: "'And you also have to try and keep an alky singer sober...'"
quote: "'It's the least I can do after Saturday night...'"
quote: "She gave him a penetrating look with bloodshot eyes. Then she took money from her purse, put it in the saucer with the bill, folded up the newspaper and stood. 'In any case, when I read the article... I can't do that to you. I organised a sitter...'"
quote: "'A sitter?' he asked as they walked to the door, his head still full of complicated BEE transactions."
quote: "'Benny, you're repeating everything I say. The concert promoters. Ella is my temporary assistant. She... You can drop me off at Grand West. She'll look after me.'"
quote: "He stopped outside on the pavement. 'What did you tell her?'"
quote: "He began to walk to the car again, unlocked the door for her, got in the other side. Switched on the ignition. Switched it off again. He turned to her. 'Does she know you are an alcoholic?'"
quote: "'You'll have to tell her.' Alexa just sat there."
quote: "'I can only drop you off there,' Griessel said, 'if she knows everything.'"
quote: "Now she turned on him, angry. 'Who do you think you are?'"
quote: "'I am nothing,' he said quietly. 'But you are not. You are Xandra Barnard.'"
quote: "He stared at her, searching for some other way to handle this, but he could think of nothing, his brain was fuzzy."
quote: "Abruptly she jerked open her handbag, pulled out her cellphone. She tapped a number crossly while glaring at him aggressively. She pressed another key on the phone, so that it rang and Ella's voice was audible over the tiny speaker."
quote: "'And you must know, if you tell anyone about this conversation, anyone under the sun, I will... destroy you. Do you understand?'"
quote: "'My name is Benny Griessel. I'm going to give you my number now. If you feel you can't cope with Alexa, phone me. At any time.'"
quote: "'I will come and relieve you tonight. You have to know, Alexa will try to manipulate you. She is going to be angry, she will cry, she will ask nicely, she will use all her charm. She is going to have withdrawal symptoms this afternoon, she will shout at you, she will try to blackmail you emotionally.' He saw Alexa's eyes flashing. 'That is not Alexa, that is the booze. You must understand that. If you can't deal with it, say so now.'"
quote: "Her arms were firmly crossed and she stared out of the window."
quote: "'I'll be grateful if you would come with me to the photographer first,' he said. 'The one who took the photos of her.'"
quote: "She did not reply, so he started the car and drove away. She would have to give him directions if she wanted him to drop her off at the promoters, in the meantime he was going to the photographer."
quote: "In Somerset Street his phone rang. MBALI, the screen read."
quote: "'He's a part-time shooter, Benny,' said Mbali with a degree of excitement. 'He's a working man, a weekend warrior.'"
quote: "'I looked at the time stamp on the emails. On weekdays, he sends them late at night. Always on a Monday. On weekends, it's early morning on a Saturday, and middle of the day on Sundays. The fact is, all his emails were sent on those three days. Saturday, Sunday, Monday. And the first two shootings were on the weekend. That can't be a coincidence. So I'm thinking he must be busy in the week. He is employed, and he probably works with other people, he has to wait for the evenings or the weekends to write the emails.'"
quote: "'And you know what that means, Benny? If he is going to shoot someone today, it won't be until after hours. So we have to make sure the stations are alert. I'm going to be very unpopular... And I might be wrong.'"
quote: "He knew what she meant. The day shift at the stations would have to work a few hours longer. 'Talk to Colonel du Preez. Because if you're right...'"
quote: "'Then we might just catch him. I'm on my way to the armoury. I'll talk to Nyathi when I get back. Good luck, Benny.'"
quote: "He turned off the engine. Before he got out, Alexa broke the silence. 'Simóne. Do you remember Simóne, the singer?' she whispered."
quote: "'Well endowed, always a bit of a low neckline, in the mid nineties she sang a lot of commercial pop? One or two hits, then she sort of disappeared?'"
quote: "'No.' There had been so many of them who had come and gone."
quote: "'One night, back then, before a concert, she showed me her photos. They were almost like Hanneke Sloet's, the same soft lighting. Flattering angles. Not as naked as these photos, but specially taken. For herself. Simóne was a real little diva, very narcissistic. Very aware of her appearance, always near a mirror. And concerned about her status, because she wanted recognition so badly. Appreciation. Ambitious, she never stopped talking about what she wanted to achieve. If she considered you her inferior, she would ignore you. Envious, if you were more successful than she was. And she was manipulative. Like an alcoholic...' Alexa smiled at him, small and hurt and forgiving."
quote: "He looked at her, saw the ravages of drink, now somewhat camouflaged, and thought of the demons that were consuming her. But behind everything was this glittering intelligence that he had discovered little by little in the past months. Sometimes it filled him with despair – what would she see in him – and sometimes with total admiration. Like now."
quote: "Anni de Waal and an assistant were in the studio busy setting up lighting. She looked up and a curious frown changed into a beaming smile."
quote: "'Alexa!' she said, and approached them with wide welcoming arms."
quote: "De Waal was middle-aged, with intense eyes behind small round glasses. Her long grey hair was gathered up in two ponytails. A light blue scarf was knotted around her neck above the collar of the white T-shirt. For a woman of her age, thought Griessel, her bottom looked surprisingly good in the faded denim."
quote: "De Waal glanced back at Alexa fleetingly, as though trying to work out the connection. She was quick. 'Hanneke Sloet,' she said."
quote: "They sat around a white painted coffee table in the corner of the studio, on deep blue easy chairs, Anni de Waal consulted her iPad with practised fingers. 'Saturday fourteenth of August. Last year. She must have booked ahead in June, because my diary stays full.'"
quote: "'Personal use. That's what I wrote down. I have to ask, because it influences the whole approach.'"
quote: "De Waal shook her head. The ponytails bobbed. Her hands talked along. 'I do fashion shoots, mostly for overseas magazines. It's much more... Let's just say they pay in Euros. Personal portraits are time consuming, and to be frank, there are always complications. The sort of people who have them done... they are usually not as photogenic as they like to think. So I am expensive. To discourage them.'"
quote: "'For you, my darling, a special price,' she said with a vague flirtation in her voice. 'Ten thousand. Rand, of course. You have an interesting face. Are you of Slavic origin?'"
quote: "'Wonderful,' said Anni de Waal, and clapped her hands together, laughing."
quote: "'A lot. She was impressive. Photogenic. Strong woman. Pretty. And because I do so few personal portfolios... Naturally, when I saw her in the papers, in January... then it all comes back to you again.'"
quote: "'She made the appointment, she arrived here with a small suitcase of clothes, and she knew exactly what she wanted. She articulated her requirements intelligently, which helps a great deal, of course. It was a cold rainy morning, and I had the heaters on, it takes a while, it's a big room. So we did the outfits first, before the nude studies...'"
quote: "'Not really. Before we began shooting... She wanted to know who would see the pictures, how exactly that worked. Then I told her we could do the prints ourselves, it would cost a little more. She was satisfied with that. And the shoot itself... The way I work – the photos go straight to Adobe Lightroom, so the client can assess them immediately. She was easy. We adjusted the exposure slightly, she wanted it to be darker. More mysterious. When we were finished, she chose her prints, the rest I put on a DVD. She collected them a week or so later. It takes time, my darling, I shoot in RAW, my assistant converts them to jpeg for the DVD.'"
quote: "'Precisely,' said Anni de Waal. 'With all due respect, my darling, men just don't understand.'"
quote: "'You will see, Captain. Come with me, I will take you to him.'"
quote: "She walked after him crossly. That was the trouble with the young ones. No work ethic, no respect for women, senior officers or colleagues."
quote: "Giel de Villiers, in a blue oil-stained police overall, was stooped over a lathe with a can of lubricant in his hand. He didn't hear them come in, and the constable had to tap him on the shoulder. He looked up, saw Mbali, and gave a slow double blink. For a moment it confused her, she thought the look was critical, superior. But then she saw the strange eyelids that blinked from below, like a lizard. She immediately understood his nickname."
quote: "'Good day, Sergeant,' she called above the noise of the lathe."
quote: "He raised his hand in greeting, turned the lathe off carefully, put down the can, and wiped his hands on a cloth. His bald head gleamed in the sunlight that shone through the window. His eyes blink-blinked again."
quote: "'Sarge, this is Captain Mbali Kaleni, from the Hawks,' the constable said."
quote: "'I'm sorry, Captain, my English is not good,' said de Villiers."
quote: "'Captain Benny Griessel said you could help me,' she said slowly, so he could follow."
quote: "'I would really appreciate your help. We need information on silencers. For a rifle.'"
quote: "'A firearm, you cannot silence it,' he said slowly and carefully, the Afrikaans accent heavy on the 'r' sounds. 'It can only be suppressed. That is why it is called a sound suppressor.'"
quote: "'I see...' She realised the constable was standing behind her, wide-eyed and fascinated. 'You can go and man your post,' she said."
quote: "He drew himself to attention, saluted smartly. 'Yes, Captain!' Clicked his heels, turned, and walked out briskly."
quote: "She turned her attention to de Villiers. 'We have reason to believe that the man shooting members of the SAPS is using a rifle with a telescope and a suppressor. Where can people buy a suppressor?'"
quote: "'There's a gun shop in Jo'burg... But they don't sold many.'"
quote: "Mbali's scowl deepened. 'So, if a lot of hunters use them, but this shop does not sell many... I don't understand.'"
quote: "'This gun shop... how you say... imports the suppressors from Vaime in Finland. They are too...'"
quote: "He shut his eyes while trying to find the English words. '... expensive. So people have them made by... gunsmiths.'"
quote: "'I don't know. But I think all of them.'"
quote: "Mbali opened her massive handbag, took out her notebook and pen, and wrote in it. 'So I just go to these people and ask them to build me a suppressor?'"
quote: "'Depends on the type of suppressor. About one thousand eight hundred, or two thousand rand. For the... how you say... screw-on.'"
quote: "'Game farms. They have tourists, and they have hunters at the same time. So they don't want to have noise from the hunters' shots. And the hunters want to shoot more bucks. If you hunt springbuck in the Karoo, and they hear the shoot, they all ran away. If you use a suppressor, they stand longer. And you can shoot more.'"
quote: "'I don't like the killing of animals,' said Mbali dubiously."
quote: "'Yes, in my office. I will give you all the numbers.'"
quote: "'Thank you. You said suppressors can be imported from Finland?'"
quote: "'Do you need a permit to have a suppressor built over here?'"
quote: "She wrote, then asked, 'Just how much of the noise is suppressed?'"
quote: "'How quiet? If I shoot a rifle from a car in a street, how far can the shot be heard?'"
quote: "'A good suppressor can make it very quiet.' He unfolded his arms, clapped his hands together, hard. 'About like that. Eighty-five per cent more quiet.'"
quote: "Mbali nodded. 'OK,' she said. 'Can you get me the contact details?'"
quote: "De Villiers began walking to the door. Then he stopped and looked at her. His eyes closed as if he was having deep thoughts. 'You can also build your own suppressor.'"
quote: "Alexa and he drove in silence to the Grand West Casino in Goodwood."
quote: "Griessel thought he understood Sloet better now. Gabby Villette had described her as an 'excluder' who deliberately distanced herself from the personal assistants. Then Alexa's story of the narcissistic singer who ignored people if she felt they were her inferior."
quote: "Both of them had talked about ambition, of a woman who would do anything for prestige and promotion."
quote: "It all meant that the photos were meaningless, they weren't relevant to her murder. She was just a self-satisfied woman who wanted to show off her assets. 'A monument,' Alexa had called it. De Waal had referred to 'something tangible'."
quote: "He pulled the cellphone out of his pocket, called Cupido. 'Vaughn, I'm going to be late. And I will have to see the colonel first. Can you let Roch know we will be there closer to half past ten?'"
quote: "'I won't drink today,' she said. 'But you must come and tell me tonight. About... how you're getting on.'"
quote: "When they drove through the gate of the Grand West Casino, Alexa phoned Ella. 'We're here. It's best if you come and fetch me from the car, otherwise my detective will think I'm going to escape.'"
quote: "Griessel saw her hand shaking. Her battle of the day was intensifying."
quote: "She indicated where he should go, where he should stop."
quote: "A young woman came jogging out of the building. He recognised her. It was the pretty one who had confused him with Paul Eilers on Saturday evening. Before he made a complete fool of himself."
quote: "'No need to worry, Paul Eilers, I'll handle this,' she said with great self-confidence."
quote: "I'm a tough cookie,' she said. 'It won't be necessary.'"
quote: "Colonel Zola 'Giraffe' Nyathi looked at the seven names on the list of directors of Ingcebo Resources Limited. His face grew sombre, then he rose and said, 'I think we should talk to the brig.'"
quote: "Griessel followed him to the office of Musad Manie. The brigadier was in a meeting with four group heads. Nyathi said, 'Apologies, but we need to talk to you.'"
quote: "'Gentlemen, if you don't mind,' said Manie to the senior officers. They stood up, walked to the door, looking curiously at Griessel."
quote: "Nyathi and Griessel sat down. The colonel waited until the door closed and slid Benny's notebook over to Manie. 'The deal Hanneke Sloet was working on. It's BEE.'"
quote: "'I see,' said Manie, the foreboding of trouble in his voice."
quote: "'This is the list of company directors. There is a former ANC cabinet minister, and two were provincial premiers. These three I'm not sure about... But director number seven could be our problem.'"
quote: "'A. T. Masondo,' Manie read. 'I don't know him.'"
quote: "'He was on the Central Committee of the Communist Party, late nineties.'"
quote: "A shadow crossed Manie's granite face when he put two and two together. 'Our communist.'"
quote: "'Yes. He was also in Mbeki's second cabinet. Deputy Minister of Mining, I think.'"
quote: "'She met them briefly. Her boss said he doubts she had any further contact with them.'"
quote: "Griessel nodded. 'Brigadier, the whole transaction... It's people borrowing money to buy fifteen per cent of a company, but without risk... I don't really understand it... I will have to get Bones in.'"
quote: "'Yes,' said Manie. 'All right.' He looked at the colonel. 'Will you talk to Bones?'"
quote: "'I have to go to Stellenbosch first, Brigadier,' said Griessel. 'To talk to Sloet's ex...'"
quote: "'Let him read the file,' said Manie. 'I swear, I will fire his butt if he talks. This thing is a minefield.'"
quote: "'Benny, please. Only the four of us know. Let's keep it that way.' Very earnest."
quote: "'Sir, I don't know what it is. It's just... strange.'"
quote: "'The whole damned thing is strange,' said Manie. He tapped the list in Griessel's notebook. 'But we can't afford to ignore it.'"
quote: "'I'll brief Bones,' said Colonel Nyathi, the tension in him obvious now. He stood up."
quote: "'Her cellphone records don't show anything. There were no other men.'"
quote: "'That's the problem. Cellphone is yesterday's technology. I mean, did they check her Facebook account?'"
quote: "'Tweeeet,' Cupido stretched the vowel to correct the pronunciation. 'It's social media, Pops. You broadcast yourself.'"
quote: "'It's the new way. You tell the world what you're doing.'"
quote: "'For herself. That's what the photographer said. It's a woman thing.'"
quote: "'And you believe that shit?' Cupido worked his phone again. 'Let us see if Sloet had a Twitter account...'"
quote: "Reginald 'Lithpel' Davids was Forensics' lisping computer whizz, small and frail, with the face of a boy, two missing front teeth and a big Afro hairstyle."
quote: "'OK. Lithpel doesn't miss much. Canny coloured, that bro'... Nope. No account, not under her own name anyway. Big tits, no tweets... So what were you and the Giraffe and the Camel doing just now?'"
quote: "The Hawks' bush telegraph, lightning fast as usual. 'Politics,' said Griessel. 'You don't want to know.'"
quote: "The Bonne Espérance estate was on the R310, just beyond the Helshoogte Pass. They drove through the white, gabled gate and the avenue of oaks to the visitor's centre."
quote: "'Tourist trap,' said Cupido when they got out and he looked at the advertising signs. 'Wine tasting, five-star dining, spa... Don't they make enough money from the wine?'"
quote: "She giggled. 'Nothing. That's where Egan and the guys make the barrels, sir.'"
quote: "That shut Cupido up as they walked, past the gracious old homestead and the cellar, to the back, where crates were stacked beside tidy rows of viticulture implements. A farm labourer had to direct them again, until they found the entrance, a nondescript wooden door."
quote: "Griessel pushed it open, smelled the smoke and the fire. It was a large space, with yellow lime-washed walls. It was hot inside. In one corner a big man stood with his back to them. He was working on a small vat. He was tap-tapping a metal hoop down over the pieces of wood, with smoke coiling through the opening of the barrel. His white T-shirt was wet with sweat."
quote: "The man did not respond. Griessel noticed the earphones behind the thick black hair, the little wire down to an iPod on his belt. He went closer."
quote: "Rows of tools hung there, odd hammers and axes, wood planes, files, and a series of long, thin metal staves. The points were very sharp."
quote: "Cupido tapped the broad shoulder. Roch looked around, smiled apologetically, put the adze down on a wooden workbench and took out the earphones. 'Sorry,' he said."
quote: "'That's right, excuse the dirty hand,' he said, and held it out to Cupido, his voice deep, his smile full of self-confidence."
quote: "Griessel recognised him from the photos in Sloet's album. Roch in real life looked even more like a man who should be on TV, his face strong and symmetrical. Powerful arms, big hands, he was a head taller than Cupido."
quote: "'Captain Vaughn Cupido, Hawks. And this is Captain Benny Griessel.'"
quote: "'Oh... OK, pleased to meet you. Do you... I have a little office...'"
quote: "'No, this is fine,' said Cupido. 'Tell me, where did Tommy Nxesi interview you?'"
quote: "'I went to see him. In Green Point. He asked... Why?'"
quote: "'You do an apprenticeship. Overseas. Are you sure you don't want to sit down. Coffee? Tea?'"
quote: "'No thanks. What do you learn when you make barrels?'"
quote: "'Phew. It's a long list. You first have to learn to select the right wood. French oak, the best comes from the forests of Tronçais and Jupilles...'"
quote: "'No, I mean what sort of manual work. Woodwork? Metalwork?'"
quote: "'Oh, yes, of course, a bit of both, it's very specialised...'"
quote: "Griessel knew Cupido was also thinking of Prof Pagel's pathology report, the 'considerable force of the stabbing action', the possibility of a home-made weapon. He knew his colleague would take over the interview, it was his way. But he was in too much of a hurry, his approach was too aggressive."
quote: "'I wouldn't mind a cup of coffee,' said Benny."
quote: "'Great, I could do with a cup myself. Please come through.' Roch gestured at an interior door."
quote: "The 'little office' was a work of art. The desk was raw oak, the same fine grain as the vats, the chairs were antique ball-and-claw, upholstered in red, the floor was grey cement, polished to a shine, with a single Persian carpet over it. Against the wall was a painting of a cooper's workshop from a bygone era, against the other a huge oil painting of a vineyard landscape in a foreign country."
quote: "Roch made a phone call to order the coffee, and came and sat down with the detectives in one of the old chairs, stretching his legs out in front of him in a relaxed way."
quote: "'I heard on the radio that you have taken over the case. It's rough, the guy shooting...'"
quote: "'We have to interview everyone again,' said Griessel quickly, before Cupido could get going again."
quote: "'According to your statement you and Hanneke broke up a year before her death.'"
quote: "'It wasn't a whole year. Eleven months. February last year.'"
quote: "'At Moyo, the restaurant at Spier. One Sunday evening, December 2007.'"
quote: "Roch smiled with nostalgia. 'It was a night to remember. Hanneke was... There were five or six women at the table, and she stood out. In every way...'"
quote: "'That's right. I couldn't resist the temptation. We... myself and two friends, we went and sat with them. And... the rest is history.'"
quote: "'Relationships cool off, I suppose that's life... We'd been together for two years, her hours kept getting longer. And those last two, three months, we barely saw each other. Now and then on a Saturday night, a Sunday morning. We would have gone skiing together that December, but she had to cancel. And then, in February last year, she arrived here one evening...'"
quote: "'No, I live in a cottage up against the mountain. She phoned from her office, about five, to ask if she could come over. She was late, she only arrived after nine. She came to tell me we should take a breather.'"
quote: "'Those were her words. She said... she was very sorry, very sad, she said it was unfair to both of us, the fact that we never saw each other any more. And she didn't want to prevent me from finding anyone else.'"
quote: "'I said I didn't want anyone else, and I understood that she was working hard. It didn't worry me, it was temporary, she wouldn't be that busy for ever.'"
quote: "'Of course not. I... Hanneke... I thought she would be my wife.'"
quote: "'Not angry. Disappointed. No, more than that... Hang on, surely you're not insinuating...' The outstretched legs were pulled back and he sat up straight in the chair."
quote: "'I'm not insinuating anything. I'm asking,' said Cupido."
quote: "Roch put his forearms on his knees, leaned forward. He shook his head in disbelief. 'You actually think that I... It's one helluva insult. About everything,' he said, controlled but hurt."
quote: "'You think that I could... do anything to Hanneke. A year after we broke up? A year? What sort of person do you think I am?'"
quote: "'Did you read my statement? I wasn't even in the country when Hanneke died. How do you do your work?' he asked with more astonishment than rage."
quote: "Griessel said soothingly, 'Mr Roch, we need your help. We have to investigate everything over again. We have to make sure...'"
quote: "He looked from one to the other. 'Good cop, bad cop. I see.'"
quote: "'I see what you're trying to do. But hell, it's insulting...'"
quote: "'Why? Because we think a guy gets angry when his future wife drops him? That's insulting?' Cupido asked."
quote: "'Wait, please.' A polite request, with his big hand in the air. 'I can understand... I was probably angry too.'"
quote: "'With the bunch of lawyers who made her work so late. With myself, for not seeing it coming, for not doing something about it earlier. I could have made more time, been more supportive. But with her... I was very disappointed. Because she didn't love me enough, because she was so stubborn, because she didn't want to wait, because she wouldn't give us a chance.'"
quote: "Roch looked reproachfully at Cupido. 'Hurt, Captain. The hurt was worse. I loved her. Genuinely loved her. She was an amazing person. We were great together. In every way. The same interests, the same sort of friends... it's a great loss, when you lose something like that. But what can you do? You take it like a man and you get through it. Even if it takes six months, nine months, you come out on the other side. You don't look back. And you respect her decision, that's what you do, because that is what love means, you respect her decision.'"
quote: "A soft knock on the door. The coffee had arrived."
quote: "Once the coffee was poured and handed around, Roch sat down again, still with a long-suffering, wounded expression on his face."
quote: "'Aime la Plagne, in the Alps, for a week. Then Bordeaux. In France.'"
quote: "'I landed in Johannesburg in the morning. I was back in the Cape around two o'clock in the afternoon, if I remember correctly. I can go and check...'"
quote: "'For the most part. Aime was for skiing. Then I went to Bordeaux to visit my mentor, at Château Haut Lafitte. So it was sort of work too...'"
quote: "'I would be grateful if you could find the documentation for us.'"
quote: "'Did you see Sloet again after you broke up?' Cupido asked."
quote: "'It's an expression, Captain. I saw her twice. If you are together for two years, you leave stuff in each other's places. About two weeks after... sometime in March last year, I took two boxes of her stuff to her.'"
quote: "'I had... I couldn't understand it, the whole thing. But it was that time, I was hurt, I just couldn't figure out how she could just turn her back on everything, out of the blue.'"
quote: "'She asked me if I really thought she wouldn't have the guts to admit it if it was so.'"
quote: "'Then I said, no, that's true. She had always had guts. For anything.'"
quote: "'The first week. Tuesday night? She had started packing up, for the move to Cape Town. She found more of my stuff. Jerseys, socks, stuff like that. She brought them to me one evening.'"
quote: "'She brought the stuff. We talked...' For the first time the body language was less comfortable, the eyes glanced once quickly at the door."
quote: "'Well... it was the first time I had seen her with the new...' He cupped his hands in front of his chest."
quote: "'She said she had wanted to do it for a long time. And she asked me if I liked it.'"
quote: "'The operation – was it a surprise for you?' Griessel asked."
quote: "'Yes. She never talked about it while we were together. And it wasn't as if she was small...'"
quote: "'Wait, wait,' said Cupido. 'She asked you if you liked the boobs?'"
quote: "Roch's eyes drifted to the door. 'Mr Roch...' Cupido prodded him."
quote: "'Then she showed them to me,' he said at last, as if he was relieved to get it off his chest."
quote: "'She didn't undress. She was just wearing a T-shirt, she... you know, loosened her bra, lifted her shirt...'"
quote: "'We were together for two years, Captain, it's not like we had never been naked together.'"
quote: "'But you'd broken up what... ten months before? And she comes in and shows you her boobs?'"
quote: "'You make it sound so cheap. I never said she just walked in and showed me her breasts. We sat talking for ages. Drank wine. Later I asked her why she had had it done.'"
quote: "'And then she flashed her headlights. And you just looked?'"
quote: "Roch got up in a flowing movement, walked behind the chair. 'I'm not sure it's...' He went to the desk, turned around, came and sat down again. The detective's eyes followed him."
quote: "'You told Warrant Officer Nxesi that you had practically no contact any more, Mr Roch,' Griessel said."
quote: "'Twice. In more than a year. What would you call it?'"
quote: "Roch moved his hands in frustration, he gripped the arms of the chair, and said, 'If you really must know, we had sex.'"
quote: "'What difference does it make?' Roch asked, for the first time truly angry. 'Tell me, what difference does it make? We didn't plan it, we had been together two years, we were... both very physical, we had already had a few glasses, we were two consenting adults. Tell me, what difference does it make?'"
quote: "'Let me tell you,' Cupido leaned forward in his chair, his index finger pointed at Roch, 'you lied to Nxesi.'"
quote: "'What have I got to hide? I was on a fucking plane when somebody killed Hanneke. What have I got to hide?'"
quote: "Roch looked intently at Cupido. If this man jumped up now, Griessel thought, they were in trouble. He shifted in his chair to make his service pistol accessible."
quote: "But Egan Roch sank slowly back. He shook his head as if he couldn't believe what he was hearing. 'That is such an insult,' he said finally. 'Do me a favour. Call the office of Air France. Ask them if they have an air hostess by the name of Danielle Fournier who was on the flight from Charles de Gaulle to O.R. Tambo on the nineteenth of January. And then go and talk to her. Ask her if she remembers me. And then come back to me with your shit.'"
quote: "Griessel did not entirely share Cupido's assurance. There was too much quiet bravado in Roch's 'Call the office of Air France'. And Home Affairs would be able to confirm when his passport was registered again on his return. But they would have to follow up, because Cupido was right, the man hadn't told Nxesi the whole truth."
quote: "'We will have to get a two-oh-five,' said Griessel. The SAPS could only request cellphone records if they had a two-zero-five subpoena. 'See if he phoned her at work.'"
quote: "'Right. Captain Cupido will nail him.' And after a moment to reflect. 'Because you have other fish to fry?'"
quote: "'No,' said Griessel. And in that instant, inexplicably, he knew what was bothering him about the sniper's last email."
quote: "Major Benedict Boshigo, member of the Statutory Crimes Group of the Hawks' Commercial Crimes Branch in the Cape, was sitting behind his chaotic desk when Griessel entered. Boshigo's nose was almost pressed to the printouts that covered the whole surface of the desk."
quote: "Boshigo was something of a legend, a long distance athlete, a man who had finished the Comrades seventeen times, and the Boston and New York marathons once each. Thanks to those events and a frightening training regime, he was a walking skeleton, literally skin and bone, And that was why his friends called him 'Bones'."
quote: "'Bottom line, Benny, I looked at the detailed joint cautionary announcement of Ingcebo and Gariep. That's the announcement they made about the whole deal, November 2009, that's the blueprint for the transaction, how they plan to do the whole thing. A road map. I looked at where they are now, how they adhered to the plan. There's no motive for murder. I looked at Ingcebo, at the registration documents, at the company charter, at the appointment of directors, it's all clean. There's nothing.'"
quote: "Boshigo shuffled through the documents until he found the right one, and held it out to Griessel."
quote: "'That's Masondo, along with the directors of Gariep Minerals. Taken in 2006, when he was minister. He was the guest speaker at their AGM.'"
quote: "'It looks like he's the one who brought in the Gariep deal for Ingcebo. It was his ticket for a seat on the gravy train. Problem is, that's no crime. It's all in the public domain.'"
quote: "An incoherent extremist. A disturbed, unpredictable person who would make a stupid blunder sooner or later. That's what they thought, and it suited him very well."
quote: "He must confirm that perception. He must lead them further from the truth."
quote: "Just as Griessel stood up from his desk to go to Cupido, his cellphone rang."
quote: "'New boyfriend?' He hadn't even known she had an old boyfriend."
quote: "'Some or other rugby dude. Muscleman.' The last word pronounced as though it was something unmentionable. 'Calla Etzebeth.'"
quote: "'I know, Pa, I'm not stupid. But it's hypocrisy. That's what I say.'"
quote: "'Seems like they met during Rag. During the Windows festival. And now Rag is history. A year before I can go and study.'"
quote: "Griessel couldn't keep up. 'Now you want to study? I thought you just wanted to play music...'"
quote: "'Pa, it's an option. A guy has to keep his options open. How could Maties do away with Rag?'"
quote: "The telephone on his desk rang. 'Fritz, hold on...' He picked up. 'Griessel.'"
quote: "Griessel sat down, his mind on Carla. And Calla, the muscle-bound rugby player with the Maori tattoo."
quote: "He had a good relationship with his daughter. They talked about a lot of things. Why hadn't she told him about Calla Etzebeth, new boyfriend? There must be a reason. Was she afraid of the muscle man? Was he on steroids, one of those that produced outbursts of rage and pimples? What had he said to her, complain to your father and I'll smack you?"
quote: "'Do you want me to call the press, lady?' Cupido asked over the phone. 'Tell them Air France isn't interested in aiding the police in apprehending the cold-blooded killer of an innocent young woman?'"
quote: "Did Anna know about the relationship? What did a Maori tattoo look like? What sort of young man would let that be done to him? He would have to take a look on Facebook. First have to find out how. Facebook. Twitter. Cupido calling him 'old school'. Maybe it was true, but where did people find the time for all this stuff?"
quote: "'When will you get back to me? Every minute this killer is loose...' said Cupido, and cast his eyes up to the heavens."
quote: "'Thank you,' said Cupido, and slammed the phone down. 'Fucking Frenchies,' he said. 'Won't give me mademoiselle Danielle Fornicate's telephone number. Eet ees not cahmpahnee poleecee,' he put on his French accent, but to Griessel it sounded more like Spanish."
quote: "Griessel sighed. 'I have to look at something on it. Later. We have to go and listen to Mbali first.'"
quote: "In the parade room, Colonel du Preez, commanding officer of CATS, and Mbali stood in front of a substantial team. There were four senior uniforms, CATS detectives, and Captain Philip van Wyk of IMC, the Hawks' Information Management Centre."
quote: "Small calibre, Griessel thought. Strange. He had expected something more impressive."
quote: "'This helps us a lot,' said Mbali. 'I am going to ask you four guys to help Captain van Wyk and the IMC. We need to get the names of everyone who owns a triple-two or a two-two-three rifle from National Firearms Registry, and those who bought Remington Premier Accutip cartridges. IMC will create a database to crosscheck them. I know it's a big job, it's a tedious job, but we have to remember, we have this madman who's shooting our colleagues. So, as the data comes in, we also have to check it against a list of people who had suppressors made. I've spoken to two gunsmiths who build suppressors, and they say they all keep invoices with names and addresses. I need you to be forceful and assertive in getting the data from the gun shops and the gunsmiths. Time isn't on our side. We'll start with the Western Cape, and broaden the search from there if we don't have any luck.'"
quote: "Griessel watched how the men sat and listened to her. They were focused, as always when members of the Force were in the firing line."
quote: "Mbali gave a description of the silencer. She clapped her hands to illustrate the sound. She said it could be masked by street noise, therefore police stations in the busier parts of the Peninsula should be especially alert. The task team was ready, she gave them the number again. If any patrol spotted a suspicious vehicle, please, just write down the particulars, the make and colour and registration number, let her and the task team know."
quote: "When the detectives and the uniformed officers stood up and filed out, Griessel approached her. Cupido followed him."
quote: "'Yes,' he said, 'of course. Mbali, the sniper... I've been thinking all morning. There must be a reason he didn't tell the media about the communists...'"
quote: "'And all I can think of is that he is worried someone will then be able to identify him.'"
quote: "'Hang on,' said Cupido. 'The sniper is talking about communists? Is that why you...'"
quote: "'Vaughn, the brigadier will fire us both if you talk about this.'"
quote: "'In his emails... the sniper says a communist is behind Sloet's murder. And he says we know who it is.'"
quote: "'Captain,' said Mbali. 'Please. When a man uses profanity to support an argument, either the man or the argument is weak.'"
quote: "Mbali ignored him. 'Benny, you think he's worried someone can identify him?'"
quote: "'Maybe the shooter knew her. Maybe... he's worried that someone will make the connection if it gets into the media that he's talking about communists. And he knows we can't afford to go public with the information... I don't know. There must be a reason.'"
quote: "He nursed his dull head, he just couldn't formulate the thing right."
quote: "The light went on for Cupido. 'So you're saying, there's a commie... Part of the big transaction?'"
quote: "'No comment,' Griessel said. He looked at Mbali. 'All I'm saying is that we should look at all her friends' and colleagues' firearm licences, do another crosscheck...'"
quote: "'That's a good idea, Benny. Will you give me the names?'"
quote: "'Wait a bit,' said Cupido. 'Egan Roch works on a farm.'"
quote: "'Mbali said those bullets, they use them on farms for vermin. They must have vermin on a wine farm? That they shoot?'"
quote: "'Egan Roch. Sloet's ex-boyfriend. Vaughn and I went to see him this morning. He lied to Nxesi, so he's now officially a suspect.'"
quote: "'But if Roch killed her, why would he shoot policemen? Why would he write about communists?'"
quote: "Griessel considered the possibility. He thought of the missing spare key to Sloet's front door, which she could have given to someone she trusted. Someone who might now and then bonk her. 'It's possible,' he said, 'because the more we look for a communist and a motive, the less likely it is—'"
quote: "Mbali's cellphone rang inside her giant handbag. She took it out, answered."
quote: "They listened to her say, 'Yes, sir', and, 'Thank you, sir', then ring off."
quote: "'Interesting timing,' said Cupido. 'Right after we were at the barrel maker.'"
quote: "'No,' said Mbali. 'Bad timing. There goes my whole theory about the weekend warrior.'"
quote: "I pray that you are shocked at the injustice done since 18 January. Why do you say I am incoherent? I said the same thing from the begining. You know who Hanneke Sloet's murderer is. You have all been in this together with the communist for years. I have to do something to force you to break your old loyalties. I take my strength from Ecclesiastes 3. It is not extremism, it is The Truth."
quote: "Is it more important to you to protect the communist than protecting policemen?"
quote: "'Crazy mother—' said Cupido, and swallowed the last part of the word."
quote: "Mbali barely heard him. 'He sent it during lunch time,' she said, relieved."
quote: "'And the singular again,' said Mbali. 'Yesterday it was plural, in his email to the media.'"
quote: "'He's right, you know. He has been saying the same thing.'"
quote: "'I'm going to get a search warrant,' said Cupido. 'Maybe there is an underlined Bible in the barrel maker's house.'"
quote: "'I want the case file back from you first,' said Griessel."
quote: "He closed his office door, put the thick folder on his desk, and sat down, elbows on the desktop. He rubbed his eyes."
quote: "He would have to pull himself together. He had to focus. He just couldn't tell one end from the other right now."
quote: "Why did the gunman only say this now? Why hadn't he said from the beginning that there was an old connection between the communist and the SAPS? If it wasn't for the Bible verses, he would say the fucker was playing them."
quote: "He took out the older emails, read them in order."
quote: "But first he should make the call he had been putting off for two days now. He dialled the Jeffreys Bay code, then the number. It rang for a long time. Then a woman's voice, 'This is Marna.'"
quote: "'Ma'am, this is Captain Benny Griessel of the Hawks in Cape Town. I am working on the—'"
quote: "'I have to read in the papers that you've reopened the case.' A statement, without recrimination, just calm and strong."
quote: "'It's a disgrace, Captain. The papers are calling us non-stop. I don't want to portray the police in a bad light, but you make it very difficult for me.'"
quote: "'I am very sorry, ma'am. It... There is no excuse, I should have phoned you.'"
quote: "'What is going on with this man who keeps shooting policemen? Does he have a connection with my daughter? He is bringing her name into disrepute.'"
quote: "This was something he didn't want to discuss now. 'Ma'am, there are many more questions that we cannot answer. That is one of the reasons I am phoning.'"
quote: "'Ma'am, let me say I am sorry for your loss. I can understand that this is a difficult time.'"
quote: "'Thank you. We have to persevere, Captain. We have no choice. What do you want to ask me?'"
quote: "'According to your statement, Miss Sloet spent Christmas with you...'"
quote: "'Just three days. She arrived on the twenty-fourth, and she went back on the twenty-seventh. There was some uncertainty about the new apartment, whether it would be ready on time. She couldn't stay longer.'"
quote: "'Captain, you know officer Nxesi asked us all this back in January?'"
quote: "'Yes, ma'am, and I am sorry. I know it is difficult to go through all this again... the trouble is, only your official statement is on record, along with the investigating officer's notes. And I am trying to see it all with fresh eyes.'"
quote: "'I told Nxesi I had never seen Hanneke like that before. She was...' Her voice deepened with emotion, as though the wound had reopened. She was quiet a moment, and when she spoke again, Griessel could hear the effort in her voice. 'She was happy. She was never very demonstrative. Just like her mother. But I could see my child was happy. That is why her death...' Again she had to stop to gather her strength. 'It was such a loss, Captain.'"
quote: "'Ma'am, Egan Roch said they had a good relationship.'"
quote: "'They did! She just wasn't ready for the big step. She worked so hard, she had so little time for herself. What you need to know about Hanneke, Captain, is that she set very high standards for herself. She had goals. Dreams. And I think she wanted to attain them before she thought about marriage.'"
quote: "'Did she say anything about Egan Roch? When she was with you at Christmas?'"
quote: "'She just said she was glad they had parted as friends. She saw him a few weeks before, took him some of his things. And she said it was good to say goodbye like that. On good terms.'"
quote: "'No, nothing else... Why do you ask?' Sudden concern in her voice."
quote: "'Ma'am, we have to make sure we look at every angle.'"
quote: "'Egan is a wonderful man. We liked him so much.'"
quote: "'Her work was her life. Sometimes it was all she could talk about.'"
quote: "'Did she say anything about the big transaction she was working on?'"
quote: "'She did. Not that I could understand everything. But she said she was enjoying it very much. And she was meeting the most interesting people. She said she would very much like to specialise in that area. Or she would... I wish I had paid more attention... It was very complex, she tried to explain, but what do I know? In any case, she said there was so much potential in the black transactions. She was very excited about a proposal she wanted to make. To her bosses, when these contracts were finalised. And then she said she might go on her own – I remember that well, because I said she mustn't bite off more than she could chew, she had such a good job. Then she said she would approach her bosses first.'"
quote: "'I can't remember the detail. It sounded to me as though she wanted... She said, \"Ma, the sums are astronomical. We can do so much better.\" '"
quote: "'That is all that she said. \"There are such interesting people involved.\" I noticed, because Hanneke didn't say things like that lightly. She was... quite critical of people. Because she was so sharp. She didn't suffer fools gladly...'"
quote: "He waited for her to say more, but nothing came. 'Ma'am, was she very religious?'"
quote: "She hesitated only for a moment. 'Is this about the religious extremist?'"
quote: "Marna Sloet was quiet for a while. Then in a muted voice, 'No. Her father had a habit of blaming his professional and personal failures on the Higher Power, Captain. Hanneke hated that. Her motto was that you were responsible for your own fate.'"
quote: "Hanneke Sloet wanted to take a proposal to her bosses. She had thought of going it alone. Because there were large sums involved, and they could do so much better. And the 'interesting people'? What did she mean? Politicians? Communists? Something else? This fucking deal, he'd best just get up and hand the whole thing over to Bones, because he couldn't make head or tail of it."
quote: "His door burst open and Cupido leaned half-way in. 'Barrel maker is a no-go for the murder. The air hostess just phoned. Egan the Vegan chatted her up on the flight of the eighteenth. They would have had dinner here in the Cape on the twentieth, but he phoned her and said he'd just lost someone near and dear.'"
quote: "'Get a life,' she said to him. Then she closed Griessel's office door behind her, sat down and passed the document over to him. 'His new email to the newspapers...'"
quote: "Our country has descended into corruption. Murderers walk free. It is the just who are destroyed. The motto is Extremis malis extrema remedia."
quote: "You will see, only an extremist will let justice be done. The SAPS knows who the murderers of Hanneke Sloet are. I know that for a fact. Now, destruction shall be to them, unless they do their work."
quote: "'You were right,' said Mbali. 'He is still not saying a word about the communist. Just the hints about corruption...'"
quote: "'Yes. He's educated. And he's grandstanding, he's playing politics. The public will love this.'"
quote: "On their way out, Boshigo walked quickly down the corridor, and Griessel had to scurry to keep up. The Hawks' unwritten dress code was jacket and tie. Bones was in his usual T-shirt, jeans, and running shoes. This rebel streak made him popular with his colleagues, and made top management shake their heads. But the reason Griessel had so much respect for him was because the skinny man never touched a drop of alcohol. 'Don't see the use,' was all he would say about it."
quote: "He heard the young sitter's whispered answer, 'This is Ella.'"
quote: "'Sort of. She's onstage, she's going to rehearse now.'"
quote: "'She's having a hard time, Benny. She took a handful of pain pills. She's perspiring and shaking, and she's very irritable. But she says she made a deal with you. She's very brave.' Still whispering."
quote: "'OK,' he said, relieved. 'Thanks. You know you can call me.'"
quote: "'I know, Paul Eilers. Relax. I can handle it. Have to go. Bye.'"
quote: "He put the phone away. One less thing to worry about."
quote: "'I was, Benny. Been there, done that. Facebook is yesterday's news. I'm on LinkedIn.'"
quote: "Boshigo laughed. 'No. Let me put it to you this way. Facebook is for people you went to school with. Twitter is for people you wish you went to school with. And LinkedIn is for people who don't think about school any more, they want to do business.'"
quote: "'If I want to find a photo of someone, how do I go about it?'"
quote: "Boshigo's chortle was so infectious that Griessel had to laugh along. 'Vaughn says I am old school, Bones.'"
quote: "Griessel shook his head. It seemed too complicated. 'But I don't want to register with Facebook.'"
quote: "'Then you have to get someone who is on Facebook, and you ask them to email you the photo.'"
quote: "'OK,' said Griessel, taking out his phone and calling his son."
quote: "Len de Beer lived in Bertram Street in Sea Point, where the pitched-roof houses were small and squeezed together. There was an unkempt garden the size of a blanket, a white picket fence, and a slightly rusted iron gate that protested on opening."
quote: "He was a big man in a blue short-sleeved checked shirt, old grey tracksuit pants and slippers, considerably overweight, his voice surprisingly high as he said, 'Come in, come in'. The thick bushy hair and beard were dark red, and he reminded Griessel of Hagar the Horrible. Behind a pair of cheap black-rimmed glasses mended with tape his eyes were clear and bright blue. He greeted Bones with a practised township handshake of grip and re-grip, shook Griessel's hand briefly, and walked with a heavy tread to his study."
quote: "It smelled of smoke. There were bookshelves from floor to ceiling, a massive desk with a green lamp, a keyboard, mouse, four computer screens, and two television screens that apparently provided share prices and financial news."
quote: "De Beer waved them to chairs, sank down in his own with a sigh, tapped a Gauloise out of a blue pack, lit it with a match, and inhaled the smoke deeply. While his eyes flitted from one computer screen to the next, he asked, 'Clever then, are you?' His mouth was barely visible behind the beard that he combed lovingly with his fingers."
quote: "Griessel realised the question was aimed at him. He shrugged, unsure how to answer. 'I don't understand this transaction at all.'"
quote: "'Doesn't make you dumb. Bones says you aren't with corporate crime.'"
quote: "'Layman's language,' de Beer said, like a memo to self."
quote: "'I'm with you.' Griessel began to understand the 'eccentric' tag."
quote: "'Lovely. Trustees decide about the investment of pension funds. Trustees are chosen from the membership of trade unions, election of trustees is manipulated. Not all trade unions. Some of them. Get the right people on the board. Simple people. Labourers. Uninformed. Grateful for the good fortune. Easy to manipulate. You with me?'"
quote: "'Yes.' But Griessel wasn't all that sure any more."
quote: "'Lovely. You're clever.' And de Beer's fingers danced over the keyboard first, then he leaned forward and focused on one of the screens. Typed some more. Used the mouse, clicking repeatedly, eyes dancing from one screen to the next. Eventually he looked up, stroked his beard, and for the first time focused all his attention on Benny. 'Very well. Finished multi-tasking.'"
quote: "'Now we can discuss this, unimpeded and with full attention. Comrade Ambrose Thenjiwe Masondo, the communist that Bones asked me about, is a man who, in 2007, was elected to the board of trustees of the NASWU pension fund. The National Aluminium Smelter Workers Union. And afterwards he made work of getting the \"right\" people on the board with him, so that he could persuade them to entrust money to his brand new investment company. Which they duly did, to the tune of one hundred and ninety million rand.'"
quote: "He was struggling to get it all into his head, but he said, 'Yes.' He could hear from de Beer's tone of voice that they were nearing a conclusion."
quote: "'Excellent. As you probably suspected, our A. T. began to get seriously concerned. He had to get himself out of a tight spot. His solution was to court Ingcebo Resources Limited – with Gariep as bait.'"
quote: "'The company that is lending billions of rands to Gariep,' said Griessel, with huge relief that he could keep up."
quote: "'He's a genius,' said de Beer to Bones Boshigo, who shook his head laughing."
quote: "'But how does that help me?' Griessel asked. 'Where's the motive for murder?'"
quote: "'Aha,' said de Beer. 'The four-billion-dollar question. I suspect not one of the banks that are involved would be completely comfortable underwriting and financing four billion if they knew of A. T.'s capers. And Hanneke Sloet and Silberstein Lamarque were looking after the interests of one of those banks.'"
quote: "'Oh, Captain, my Captain.' Len de Beer made an expansive gesture towards the monitors in front of him. 'I know everything. And I can read between the lines as well. A. T. was managing director of Ingcebo Bauxite. But suddenly, just before the BEE deal kicked off, they redeployed him. He is still director of the mother- and sister-companies, because they needed him. But they drastically reduced his profile. They wanted to conceal his sins from the banks.'"
quote: "'You will have to find out,' said Hagar the Horrible, 'whether Hanneke Sloet knew of A. T.'s misdemeanours.'"
quote: "'If you want to know the way a river flows, you need to find the source.'"
quote: "'BEE deals begin with the big player, the initiator, the so-called deal maker. That is the man who watches the business world, spots opportunities, tests the water, brings the different companies together. Great work if you can get it, because it's big money for relatively little work. You kickstart the deal, and then you just massage until everything is complete. The deal maker in the instance of Gariep–Ingcebo is the legendary Henry van Eeden.'"
quote: "'Indeed, white and Afrikaans. He was in-house legal advisor to ConProp, the chaps who develop and own forty per cent of our shopping centres. ConProp was one of the first companies to apply black economic empowerment, around about 1997. Henry managed that transaction just about single-handed. It was pioneering work, basically, a steep learning curve, and very valuable experience. Then he took his experience and did his own thing. Right time at the right place, he must have brokered ten or twelve BEE deals. I believe he is starting to work with Chinese companies that want to invest here. I think one can describe him as \"extraordinarily wealthy\". Lives in Constantia.'"
quote: "'And he would know if the banks knew about A. T. Masondo's shenanigans?'"
quote: "That was when Griessel remembered where he had heard van Eeden's name for the first time. According to Tommy Nxesi, the last email Hanneke Sloet had sent before her death, was to van Eeden. 'Official stuff, a sort of progress report,' was how Tommy had described it."
quote: "In the car Griessel phoned Cupido and asked him to get van Eeden's contact details from the case file."
quote: "'OK,' said Cupido. 'And by the way, the barrel maker has a licence for a Taurus pistol. The PT92. But nothing else. I'm checking the people at the wine estate now. Call you back.'"
quote: "Griessel rang off. He wondered about Cupido's fervour for Egan Roch – first as Sloet's murderer, now as the shooter. There was something about Roch that made Cupido smell a rat. He understood that, he was like that too, an intuitive detective – get a scent, follow it like a bloodhound. But Cupido was too erratic, he didn't always think everything through properly. And after the fiasco of the Steyn case they had to be careful, they couldn't afford to focus exclusively on a single suspect again."
quote: "Besides, he didn't share Cupido's suspicion of the vat maker. Roch hadn't shared the whole truth with Nxesi because, Griessel believed, he wanted to protect Hanneke Sloet's reputation. And because he had a watertight alibi in any case."
quote: "The problem with this case was that he had no feel for it, no intuition about it. He was hanging by the tips of his fingers over a cliff of ignorance, of too many complex things that he only understood in the broadest terms. And he wasn't even completely sure of those."
quote: "He would have to give the case to Bones. Before he made a fool of himself again. Before he was responsible for more policemen being shot. Brigadier Manie wasn't going to like that. Yesterday the Hawks had announced with a fanfare that he, Benny Griessel, would be taking over the case. And the media would crow all over again if the investigative officer changed within twenty-four hours."
quote: "Let them talk to Henry van Eeden, the big deal maker first. Then he would bring up the subject."
quote: "'Big money,' said Bones Boshigo when they stopped in front of the big wrought-iron gate in Hohenhort Avenue, Constantia. 'Very big money.'"
quote: "A high, white plastered wall, but through the gate they could see the paved driveway that wound between expansive green lawns and dense trees. The house was not visible from here."
quote: "Boshigo pressed a button on the intercom beside the driver's door. A tinny voice answered after a while. 'Yes?'"
quote: "'Major Benedict Boshigo and Captain Benny Griessel for Mr van Eeden.'"
quote: "'He is expecting you. Drive straight on to the house, please.' The big decorative gates swung slowly and silently open."
quote: "They drove in. The estate opened up, the view of Constantia Mountain beyond to the right, and False Bay to the left. The house appeared on the rise behind oak trees, Cape Dutch and massive."
quote: "The driveway flowed into an oval parking area. A white sports car was parked outside one of the four garages, crouched like a predator, glittering in the sun. A black man in neat overalls was polishing it. 'Lamborghini Gallardo,' said Bones. 'Two million, Benny. Eight years' salary.'"
quote: "They got out. Griessel looked at the swimming pool that sparkled one level down, at the rose bushes in full white bloom, the borders spilling over with multicoloured summer flowers, at the rolling lawns, the perfect neatness. How did you mow all that? How many people did it take to look after this garden? How big was their water bill? He followed Bones towards the front door. Suddenly, just to the left of the path, someone stood up from behind the roses – a woman in a light blue sun hat, wearing gardening gloves and holding pruning shears in her hand."
quote: "For a second Griessel froze, because he thought it was Alexa Barnard – the same long blonde hair, green eyes, tall, full figure. But then he saw this woman was more beautiful, perhaps younger than Alexa. The elegant sweep of cheekbone and mouth and chin was so lovely to him that he suddenly felt guilty. Her nose was delicate, the skin unlined and flawless, without the damage of drink. And the smile was warm, serene, a woman without demons, content with her world."
quote: "He realised he was staring. 'Afternoon, ma'am,' he said, and introduced himself and Bones. She shook their hands with her gloves on. 'Annemarie van Eeden,' she said, and pointed the pruning shears at the house. 'You must be looking for Henry. Just knock, the door is open.'"
quote: "'Thank you, ma'am.' They walked on, and all he could think of was that that was how Alexa could have looked if she hadn't been a drinker. Again the feeling of guilt – it was wrong to make comparisons."
quote: "Up the broad sandstone steps. Elegant garden furniture arranged under umbrellas on the long veranda, the front door was wide and beautiful. Bones walked ahead, and raised a hand to knock, but someone was already approaching from the cool interior. A man in his forties, athletic, energetic, in a yellow golf shirt and dark blue trousers, running shoes. His black hair was short and neat, he wore a large watch on his arm. 'Major Boshigo,' he said. 'I am Henry van Eeden.'"
quote: "They sat on the veranda and drank Earl Grey tea from fine porcelain. Bones and van Eeden talked economics. 'Our future lies in the hands of the Greeks, of all nations,' said van Eeden."
quote: "Griessel was listening with half an ear. He looked over False Bay, sparkling in the distance, and he wished he were clever. Being clever made you rich. This man who talked so easily with them was clever enough to study law. Clever enough to set up a black empowerment transaction on his own. Clever enough to see there was big money in it. Being clever made it possible for him and his beautiful wife to live here on Constantia's lovely slopes. While he, Griessel, had to make do with a bachelor flat in Gardens, with furniture from a pawn shop, and no wife. Because he was barely smart enough to scrape through matric. With an E for maths. And woodwork. Carla had inherited her mother's brains, the first Griessel in this branch of the family tree to go to university. And what does she choose? Drama. On the strength of one inspirational conversation with the stepdaughter of his friend and former colleague Matt Joubert, who was already studying it. They had money, Matt's wife Margaret restored houses and sold them, they would be able to help if Michele couldn't find work. But what was he going to do? He could barely manage Carla's university fees. And now Fritz was talking about going to university too. God knows what he wanted to study. Music? Maybe he and Anna should have followed Marna Sloet's example, taught their children from when they were little to be ambitious. Hungry, for success and riches."
quote: "'How can I be of assistance to you?' Henry van Eeden asked, putting down his empty cup and leaning back comfortably in the upholstered veranda chair."
quote: "'We think if the banks knew about Masondo and the pension money, they would have asked Ingcebo to kick him out.'"
quote: "The smile broadened. 'Major, in a perfect world that could surely happen. But not here.'"
quote: "'Gariep knew. From the beginning. That is why they insisted that Masondo was replaced as managing director of Ingcebo Bauxite.'"
quote: "'I suspect they did. They are very thorough when it comes to four billion.'"
quote: "Griessel's heart began to sink. If this communist was not their man, where would they find another one?"
quote: "'The banks' due diligence is exhaustive. And their evaluation reports are confidential. They don't even share them with each other. Silberstein Lamarque would know whether SA Merchant Bank knew of it. I would be very surprised if they didn't. But no, I don't know for sure.'"
quote: "'Major, I gather you suspect Hanneke Sloet's murder had something to do with the transaction.'"
quote: "'I would very much like to help,' said van Eeden in earnest."
quote: "Bones looked at Benny. Griessel nodded, because he couldn't see what harm it could do."
quote: "'We received information that there was a communist involved with the murder of Sloet.'"
quote: "'A communist,' said van Eeden. Then he smiled carefully, as though he thought Boshigo was pulling his leg. 'You're not serious.'"
quote: "'We thought Hanneke Sloet might have heard of his trade union tricks. Maybe she wanted to stop the loan. Or go to the press. And Masondo wanted to silence her, to stay on the gravy train.'"
quote: "'The competition,' said Henry van Eeden, 'is phenomenal. Every big legal firm in the country would give an arm and a leg to be players in the BEE world. And once you're allowed into the inner circle, you want to stay there. Silberstein Lamarque would have fired Hanneke like a shot... And I'm sure that's the last thing Hanneke would have wanted. The other question is, the banks' due diligence was completed fourteen months ago. Why would she want to do something with that information only in January this year?'"
quote: "'You say you are sure that is the last thing Hanneke would have wanted.'"
quote: "'She wrote it down. My point is, A. T. Masondo, despite his past, has influence. A network. He is one of the \"right people\". Hanneke knew that. She would have her priorities right.'"
quote: "Before they left, Griessel asked some half-hearted questions, his heart in his boots. He wanted to know from van Eeden if he had been worried that Sloet's ambitions could have negatively influenced his own business."
quote: "A roguish laugh, then van Eeden said, 'Captain, this is probably my last BEE transaction. The Chinese potential is massive, so many of them want to invest here. Fallow earth, ready for the plough. That is where I want to focus now.'"
quote: "'Not really. Maybe briefly at a meeting or a cocktail party.'"
quote: "'I seriously doubt that,' said van Eeden. 'She simply had no need to communicate with him.'"
quote: "'Are there any other communists involved with this whole deal?' Griessel wanted to know."
quote: "'Masondo was the only member of the SA Communist Party. The others showed no sign that they had any ideological leaning in that direction.'"
quote: "Griessel had two voice messages on his cellphone. The first was from Cupido. He said there were two firearms registered to the Bonne Espérance Estate. A two-seven-oh and a thirty-oh-six. They hunted occasionally, especially up in Limpopo. Apart from that, nothing. Egan the Vegan was most likely not the shooter."
quote: "The second was from Cloete, the media liaison officer. 'Benny, call me, please.'"
quote: "'They are calling him the Solomon Shooter, Benny,' said Cloete, with the guilty tone of a parent explaining the behaviour of a naughty child."
quote: "'Yes. Because of the verses. Benny, they like the guy. They like his references to corruption, they like his Latin even more. They are asking for comment from the National Commissioner and the cabinet, stuff like, \"Is this not another sign that the SAPS are failing at their job?\" And, of course, about the assertion that we actually know who the murderer is.'"
quote: "'Are we one hundred per cent sure, Benny? God knows, it will come back to haunt us...'"
quote: "'OK. Have you anything I can clear with the Camel?'"
quote: "Griessel could hear Cloete slowly blowing out cigarette smoke. 'OK,' said the liaison officer, ever-patient. 'We'll talk again.'"
quote: "'Sooner or later. But we don't have time. We don't even have a suspect. Nothing. I look at this whole thing and I see nothing. That apartment of hers, the block was not even finished when she moved in. There were plumbers, electricians, labourers... There are the men who carried in her boxes. One of them could have stolen her spare key... Or sold her some story. Practically impossible to catch a guy like that, there's nothing forensic, just a ball hair in the bathroom, and old fingerprints on the boxes – which helps us not one bit.'"
quote: "Griessel thought long and hard. Then he said, 'Footwork. Footwork and a big stroke of luck. That's all that's going to save us.'"
quote: "In Otto du Plessis Drive, trapped in the snail's pace of rush-hour traffic, the sniper watched the IRT bus passing him in the fast lane. He felt envious."
quote: "On the radio of his Audi A4 he heard the five o'clock time signal, and he turned the sound up a bit to listen to the news."
quote: "He liked it. The wisdom of Solomon. The opposite of this morning's accusations of incoherence and religious extremism, homophobia and racism."
quote: "The Solomon Shooter. Who was wise enough to know that the SAPS would have ramped up its guard on police stations significantly. In two hours he would have a new surprise for them."
quote: "Before he went to tell Manie and Nyathi that there were no communists with any motive for taking Hanneke Sloet's life, Griessel sat down in his office and phoned Hannes Pruis, the director of Silberstein Lamarque."
quote: "Pruis didn't answer his cellphone. Griessel phoned the office number. Eventually his PA answered. 'I am sorry, sir, Mr Pruis is in a meeting.'"
quote: "'Miss, we have two options. Either you go and get him out of that meeting, or I drive all the way to the city and haul him out myself.'"
quote: "While he waited, he checked his laptop to see whether Fritz had sent him an email yet."
quote: "'This better be good, Captain, I'm in a meeting.'"
quote: "'You knew that Masondo has misused trade union funds. You knew he is a communist. And you said nothing.'"
quote: "'It had absolutely nothing to do with Hanneke's death,' Pruis said, curt and angry."
quote: "Not enough sleep, the frustration of not getting anywhere with the investigation, the man's attitude, and the muscle man photograph all conspired together. Griessel lost his temper. 'But I asked you specifically about communists. And then you were very vague and said maybe. And you gave me seven names. While you knew very well that there was only one communist, and he had already made trouble. As far as I know, that is called obstructing the course of justice.'"
quote: "'Now listen carefully. I will not be threatened by a mere captain. If you want to make accusations, make them in court, then we will see.'"
quote: "'You must try to understand...' The attitude was still there, but somewhat tempered now, a man clinging to his patch of high ground. 'We... Silbersteins signed a confidentiality agreement. If we violate that... I can't gossip about the parties involved in the transaction. And Masondo... That was long ago. It's been dealt with, he's been moved out. Hanneke had no contact with him. None.'"
quote: "'As a team we talked about him once, early last year. When we weighed up the risk. Since then, never. He is a nonentity in the scheme of things. He draws a salary as director but has no influence. That is why I said nothing to you. Because there is nothing. Absolutely nothing.'"
quote: "'You're dead certain that I'm not going to find something tomorrow, or the day after tomorrow that shows that...'"
quote: "'Captain, let me say now, I would not put my firm and my own professional reputation on the line if I thought there was the slightest possibility. If I thought Masondo were involved, I would go and arrest the bastard right now myself.'"
quote: "Griessel could see the relief on his commanding officer's face, the great weight of a political mess falling away. But then Manie frowned, 'Then why does the shooter keep going on about the communist?'"
quote: "'He's playing us, Brigadier. I think he knows there's a communist somewhere. He wants us to waste our time. So he can shoot more policemen.'"
quote: "'I think he knew her, Brigadier. And she said something.'"
quote: "'Or he's taking a shot in the dark... in a manner of speaking. There are just too many different possibilities, Benny.' Then, pensively, 'Why does he want to shoot our people?'"
quote: "Griessel shook his head, then said in resignation, 'I will understand if you want to give the Sloet case to someone else, Brigadier.'"
quote: "'No, Benny,' he said decidedly. 'This is your case. What I will do is show you how the Hawks operate.'"
quote: "Musad Manie spoke first. 'Benny, you're the JOC leader on this one.'"
quote: "'We're behind you, Benny. Philip, tell him what you can do.'"
quote: "'We make connections, Benny,' said Captain van Wyk of the IMC in his quiet voice. 'We take all her contacts – phone, Internet, everything, and we start to draw lines. As the information comes in, we can give you a graph of everyone she has been in contact with. And who they are. Criminal records, credit black-listings, traffic fines... Just give us her cellphone and office numbers, her email addresses, her Facebook ID... Oh, and her banking details. We can do a full analysis, look at tendencies and patterns, anything out of the ordinary.'"
quote: "'We'll have to get all the names and ID numbers of the law firm people, her friends, the builders, and the removal company,' said Nyathi. 'The Violent Crimes group will have to do the legwork. Benny can divide you into groups and allocate responsibilities.'"
quote: "'As the info comes in, we capture it,' said van Wyk."
quote: "'Benny, would you consider bringing in PCSI? Let them go over the crime scene again?' asked Nyathi."
quote: "The PCSI were the elite forensic people, the Provincial Crime Scene Investigation unit, who worked almost exclusively for the Hawks. Griessel had never seen them in action, only heard of the advanced technological toys they used."
quote: "'Let's bring them in,' said Griessel. He tried to think what else was needed. 'We must look at similar crimes as well,' he said. 'The past five years. Murder and assaults on women who live alone, especially where robbery is not the motive. Large stab wounds. We will have to talk to the pathologists, we will have to get bulletins out to the detective branches.'"
quote: "'Don't be too specific,' said Manie. 'We spread the net wide in the beginning. Pull the parole records too, see if anyone with a similar modus operandi has been released in the past year.'"
quote: "'There is the possibility that the shooter knew her...' said Griessel."
quote: "'We will connect the databases of the two JOCs,' said Philip van Wyk. 'See what jumps out.'"
quote: "'OK,' said Nyathi, 'we'll manage this thing as it develops. Let's get cracking.'"
quote: "He tried to muster some self-confidence from his earlier sense of satisfaction, but it deserted him when he put on the overall, the wig and the cap and climbed into the Chana."
quote: "Then the tension came, from deep inside him, spreading slowly through him like a fever. He began to perspire, his hands clammy on the steering wheel, with nausea in his guts and his thoughts flitting and leaping from one risk to the other. Doubt. He wasn't made of the right stuff. They were going to catch him."
quote: "He drove south down Koeberg Road, past the police station in Milnerton. He didn't look, he knew they would be on their guard, people on the lookout. He was too scared to make a U-turn, and used Mansfield Road and Masson Road to change direction legally, then come back down Koeberg with his van pointing north."
quote: "Milnerton was busy, just before seven. Busier than he had expected. It was vehicle traffic, he consoled himself, people hurrying home, very few pedestrians."
quote: "He parked just beyond Loxton Road, so that he had an unimpeded view of the entrance to the supermarket. He scanned the area first, made very sure that no one was paying him or his panel van any attention. He climbed over the seat, pulled the curtain down quickly. Sat still for a while. His breathing was rapid. Sweat ran down his cheek – it was the wig, and the closed windows in the Cape summer heat. He wiped his hands on the overall, took the old Nokia out of his pocket. He had memorised the number. He typed it in, and phoned."
quote: "It rang six, seven times. 'SAPS Milnerton, can I help you?'"
quote: "He let his anxiety show. 'There is a robbery, at the Spar, Milnerton Mall, you have to come quickly!'"
quote: "'No, no, they will shoot me, please come quickly, it's a robbery, four men! The Spar in the Milnerton Mall, Millvale Road!' Then he cut the call, turning the cellphone off immediately. His hands shook, so that he struggled to open the battery cover. His fingers slipped. He swore softly, and then it came off. He ripped out the battery, shoved it all back in his pocket."
quote: "It was the support of his colleagues that caught Griessel offside, that made him gulp back the emotion. He knew it was the fatigue, lack of sleep, the intense day, and the stress of the unexpected new responsibility that dragged him down. He must disguise his gratitude. He gave IMC section A of the case file so they could copy all the information, he divided the detectives into teams and allocated tasks. He noticed their zeal, their focus and willingness. He heard their encouragement ('We will get him, Benny') and saw Brigadier Manie sitting off to the side and watching it all with satisfaction."
quote: "Once everyone was busy, he walked over to the commanding officer of the Hawks. 'Brigadier, there are some of the interviews I want to do myself...'"
quote: "'Carry on, Benny, JOC leader is a mobile position, we are all only a call away. They must just keep you informed, and you keep me and Zola...'"
quote: "Griessel's cellphone rang. He answered. 'This is Faber from the PCSI. We are at the apartment, can you come and unlock for us?'"
quote: "Before he could reply, he heard Mbali's voice from the doorway. 'Brigadier, he's just shot another one. And this time it's serious.'"
quote: "His mouth gaped in panic, he panted for air. His first instinct was to stamp on the accelerator, to flee, to hide away in the safety of the dark garage, but he had to suppress that desperate wish. He bellowed in frustration and fear. Everything had changed."
quote: "After an eternity, they had come, three patrol vehicles with sirens and lights had raced past, tyres squealing around the corner of Loxton Road. One had screeched to a halt there, the others had raced past, turned up Millvale, right to the front of the supermarket. Less than a hundred metres from him."
quote: "He had the rifle ready, followed the nearest one through the scope. He knew he must wait, the shot was too difficult while they were running."
quote: "Then the policeman stopped, to his surprise and relief, and he hastily positioned the cross hairs on the leg. This was his chance, he squeezed the trigger. At that instant the man crouched down on his haunches, the rifle bucked, and he knew, immediately, he could see through the lens, it was through the belly, a gut shot. A cry erupted from his throat, Christ, and the panic exploded inside him. No time to unscrew the hiking pole, he lost all self-control, throwing the rifle down on the carpet, tearing the screen up, clambering about in feverish haste. The overall hooked on something, he tugged, it ripped, he leaped over into the seat, switched the Chana on and drove, without looking. The shrill blare of a hooter just beside him, his head jerked. 'Christ,' aloud this time. A woman in a Toyota, her face twisted with rage, he just looked straight ahead, and drove. He knew he had made a big mistake. Two. Three."
quote: "He had killed a policeman. The Chana had attracted attention. And now the rifle lay in the back, out in the open."
quote: "In the CATS parade room Griessel listened as a visibly upset Mbali, phone to her ear, asked again and again, 'Is the ambulance there yet?' Then, on her way to the door, she said to Manie, 'I'm going, Brig, I have to be there.'"
quote: "Detectives on their cellphones asking stations in Bothasig, Table View and Maitland to set up roadblocks, their voices loud and urgent. Someone spoke angrily to Telkom, giving information about the telephone call that Milnerton Station had received. 'You don't understand. I can't wait until tomorrow...'"
quote: "He realised he could do something himself. He used the call-back function, got Faber of PCSI Forensics team on the line. 'You will have to go to Milnerton first. There's been another officer shot.'"
quote: "He gave it. Faber said they were on their way, and rang off."
quote: "And then the realisation came back, of the increased pressure on his investigation. He was the one who had to get his arse in gear. To stop Solomon from shooting again."
quote: "He only got away at a quarter past ten. When the news came that Constable Errol Matthys had died of his wounds in the Milnerton Medi-Clinic; the internal bleeding and organ damage were just too severe. When they were sure the roadblocks were too late, the shooter had slipped through the net. When there was nothing more for him to do."
quote: "He phoned Alexa while he was driving. She answered herself. She asked, 'How's the case going?' He could hear she was sober, and relief flooded over him."
quote: "'I'll tell Ella she can go to bed then.'"
quote: "When he stopped in front of her house twenty minutes later, the veranda light went on, she opened the door and stood waiting for him. 'You're tired,' she said, and kissed him on the cheek. 'I kept a pizza warm for you. Ella ordered them.'"
quote: "He saw the deep lines, her sallow skin tone and the sheen of perspiration on her face. She was having a hard time. Momentarily, he recalled her doppelgänger, the unblemished Annemarie van Eeden, and he felt an immense compassion for Alexa."
quote: "'I am very proud of you,' he said, and closed the door behind him."
quote: "Her shoulders sagged, as if her strength had reached its limit, and she wept. He put his arms around her. She leaned into him."
quote: "For a long time they simply stood like that, until she was calm."
quote: "He kept to his agreement dutifully. In the kitchen, while he ate the pizza and drank a glass of orange juice, he told her about his day."
quote: "She laughed at Griessel's description of Bones Boshigo and the eccentric Len de Beer, and she shook her head with a little smile over the wealth of Henry van Eeden. When he told her about Egan Roch, she leaned forward with greater concentration and nodded as though it all made sense to her."
quote: "She carried his plate and cutlery to the sink, and sat down again. They lit cigarettes together. 'I've been doing a lot of thinking,' she said. 'I don't know if it will help.'"
quote: "'Simóne, the singer with the photos... It seems to me there have been more of them in the past few years. Especially in Afrikaans music. It's an interesting phenomenon. Odd, surely, because I think most of them are women. It's as if... they are moths, Benny, in the bright light of musical limelight. They're not attracted because they're addicted to singing, they're attracted because they're drawn to the spotlight. They want to be famous. That's all.'"
quote: "He heard the seriousness, the sincerity, behind her words, and realised she was giving him a gift, a kind of apology. She had clung on to this today, her refuge in the midst of the flood."
quote: "'I don't get the feeling that it's about wealth,' she said. 'Men... to them, fame means money. And sex. But to these women it's just the concept of being known. Of being special. I struggle to understand it. I have wondered whether it's something to do with the Afrikaner and where we are now, in this South Africa? Afrikaner men have lost their power, their dramatic image. There's so much indifference about their lot now, there's only compassion for the new nation, that greater whole. Is it a woman's way of restoring some balance? A kind of rebellion, an instinctive way of filling the vacuum? Perhaps it's a universal phenomenon, too many people, there are no individuals or characters any more, we are all just... conduits.'"
quote: "He remembered his conversations today. 'Sloet told her mother about the big money in BEE deals,' he told Alexa. 'She thought about starting up on her own. She told the big brain behind it all that she wanted his job.'"
quote: "'Nine years ago she had an affair with one of the senior partners. Married man, in his fifties.'"
quote: "'She probably thought he would help her get on in her career. And I think that's the reason she broke up with her boyfriend... I don't think he was useful to her any more.'"
quote: "She smiled, in self-mockery. 'You don't need an amateur detective, do you?'"
quote: "'Her hunger. Who did her hunger put at greatest risk?'"
quote: "That was a good question. 'Not van Eeden. He's already rich... Do you think Egan Roch? Do you think he still had hopes?'"
quote: "At a quarter to seven he was in the parade room for the JOC meeting, fresh, having slept fairly well. And Alexa had looked so much better, the worst withdrawal symptoms behind her. She didn't have to rehearse today. Ella was coming to her house, and they were planning on going shopping – their specific purpose disguised in a vague and all-encompassing 'girls' stuff' brush-off that he was happy not to pursue."
quote: "The team leaders didn't have much to report – most of the information about the builders and security personnel of the apartment block would only be available during office hours. Griessel asked Cupido to unlock the crime scene for PCSI, and said that he would be in discussions with Sloet's friends and colleagues, and that his cellphone would be on at all times."
quote: "When the meeting was over, Griessel walked with van Wyk to the IMC office."
quote: "It was a large room, seven people sat at laptops in the gloom of muted lighting. A video projector displayed a graph on the wall."
quote: "'That is Hanneke Sloet's provisional contact graph for January,' said van Wyk. In the centre of the screen was a small square, marked with the initials HS. From there a delicate network of thin lines stretched to top and bottom like the facets of a diamond. 'Up here are the numbers of people who phoned her cellphone in January – the dotted lines are SMSs – and here are those she contacted. In the course of the day we will add names to the numbers. And we will get data from the service providers of calls made from July to December last year. We put each number through the RICA database for IDs, and then again through criminal records. By tonight we should have a more complete picture. And of course we will include the latest shooter developments.'"
quote: "'Woman read the story in the paper this morning, said she was driving past the scene last night, at practically the exact time, when a hippy in a white delivery van cut in front of her. Mbali is busy with her now in Milnerton.'"
quote: "'A hippy,' said Griessel sceptically. Women were usually better eye witnesses than men, he didn't know why, but a hippy?"
quote: "'Yes, we'll see about that. There's the cellphone too, at least. The shooter used it last night to phone the Milnerton station. It's not RICAed, he made no other calls during the past month with it, and he turned it off. But the phone is pay-as-you-go, he regularly bought a top-up, the last was on Saturday February fifth, airtime of R49 bought at Clicks in Canal Walk. We're following that up. Naturally we'll cross reference the number with all the gun owners... At the moment we have one hundred and forty-seven people with licences for a triple-two and two-two-three rifles in the Western Cape, who also bought Remington Accutips in the past year. Three of the rifles have been stolen in the interim, so CATS have to follow up each of those cases as well. It's going to take a long time. We haven't linked that database with Sloet's yet, we just haven't got enough manpower. This afternoon perhaps... when we know more about the panel van too.'"
quote: "Mbali stood with the woman on the pavement beside Koeberg Road. She had to talk loudly to make herself heard over the noise of heavy traffic."
quote: "'Because I left the office at exactly ten past seven,' the woman said. She was in her late forties, her hair heavily sprayed, a severe face."
quote: "'Yes. It's five minutes from here. No more than that.'"
quote: "Mbali looked around her. It made sense. He would have had a perfect view from here, a clean shot. Eighty metres, maybe. 'And then you came past.'"
quote: "'I was in the left lane. I'm always in the left lane, because a lot of traffic turns right at the Bosmansdam intersection. And then he shot out of the parking area, right here, he just swerved right into my lane.'"
quote: "'I wanted to give him the finger. So I came past.'"
quote: "'Clear as day. I hooted at him, and he looked at me. He had this little baseball cap, like faded red, and the long hair. Blond. Real hippy type, and he had these really crazy eyes, like he was going to kill me. Creepy, really, really creepy.'"
quote: "'Not really. I was too furious, the asshole. If I didn't look where I was going...'"
quote: "The woman nodded with great certainty. 'Light beige, or faded white, and it wasn't new. A Kia.'"
quote: "'A Kia? On the telephone you said you weren't sure.'"
quote: "'Well, after I called, I remembered that it was the same as the vans used by the people who deliver our spares. So I called them. They use Kias. The K2700, they say,' she said with enormous satisfaction, as though she had just solved the whole case."
quote: "It took him fifteen minutes to phone back and forth between Sloet's two friends – Aldri de Koker and Samantha Grobler – before he got a joint appointment for half past two. He phoned Prof Phil Pagel, the pathologist, and Hannes Pruis of Silberstein Lamarque. The lawyer was none too pleased to hear from him, giving a deep and heavy sigh when Griessel asked if he could see all the colleagues who had worked with Sloet, at five o'clock."
quote: "On the way through Stellenbosch he thought of his daughter. How should he manage the situation with the muscle man? Why hadn't Carla told him about it?"
quote: "He stopped himself. He mustn't let his detective's imagination run away with him. He had a good relationship with his daughter. She would have told him if there was something. And Fritz was desperate, about the tattoo. Ten to one it was just a photo taken at random, during Rag. Carla would never fall for a man with a face like that anyway – the brow so heavy, the eyes too close together. And that tattoo..."
quote: "He would phone her later. Just to make sure. If he could think of what to say."
quote: "Over Helshoogte Pass he saw the dark green vineyards on either side of the road, the beauty of the mountains behind them. He came here too seldom. He too seldom went anywhere, it was just work and sleep and a bit of music with Roes, and now and then dropping by at Alexa's. Maybe he could bring her here to one of these guesthouses one day."
quote: "Maybe. If he ever got back on his feet financially."
quote: "The Bonne Espérance Estate was much quieter on a Tuesday morning. He parked in front of the wine tasting centre again and walked straight over to the coopers shop, because he didn't want his arrival to be announced."
quote: "As he pushed open the door, he smelled the wood smoke, felt the heat. Roch was standing at one of the workbenches, a water bottle to his mouth, raised high. He saw Griessel and lowered it slowly. Not too overjoyed at the repeat visit."
quote: "'Captain,' he said tersely, and put the bottle down on the workbench."
quote: "'I hear you got hold of Danielle after all. Or don't you believe her either?'"
quote: "'It depends whether you're going to withhold information again.'"
quote: "Roch raised his eyes to the roof. 'I didn't...' He sighed. 'Come through.'"
quote: "This time he didn't offer coffee. He sat down in his chair, his body language irritable. Griessel ignored it. 'You must have wondered who murdered Hanneke,' he said evenly."
quote: "He looked at Griessel with dislike. 'No wonder the crooks are taking over the country.'"
quote: "'I'm here because I need your help,' Griessel said."
quote: "'Mr Roch, in more than eighty per cent of cases like this, the murderer is known to the victim, or in a relationship with her. You have metal tools on your wall that are similar to the murder weapon. And you didn't disclose the whole truth...'"
quote: "Roch made a gesture of barely suppressed frustration. 'I wasn't even here.'"
quote: "Roch looked down at his hands for a long time, and then up again. 'OK.'"
quote: "'It seems as though there are two possibilities. She opened the door to someone she knew, or the murderer had her spare key. Have you any idea who she might have given it to?'"
quote: "'When she was still living in Stellenbosch... she gave her spare key to me. She said then it was no good her keeping it inside...' The negative attitude lifted as he slowly sat up straight."
quote: "'I don't know... Definitely not to me. But... it was important to her that someone should keep her spare key. I used to tease her about it, she was so organised, I told her there was no chance of her losing her keys. Then she said that was not what she was afraid of. She was afraid she would fall in the shower, or something...'"
quote: "'So you think there is a good chance she gave it to someone?'"
quote: "'I don't know. Maybe one of her girl friends. Or... Did you ask at her work?'"
quote: "'You believed there was a new man in her life,' Griessel said."
quote: "'Why? Did you find something?' With the same subtle reaction as yesterday, the movement of the eyes that showed there was something that made him uncomfortable."
quote: "'Mr Roch, I will treat everything as confidential as far as I can. I understand it's difficult, in the circumstances, to talk about personal things. But I would be glad if you would tell me why that was your first reaction.'"
quote: "'It's just that Hanneke... She was... Hell, Captain, this is... This doesn't feel right.'"
quote: "'And that's why you thought there was someone else?'"
quote: "'I only believed her when we saw each other again last year. Here...' He pointed towards the mountain."
quote: "'Because she was... so intense. As though it was a long time... you know.'"
quote: "'So you don't think there was another man in her life?'"
quote: "He waved his hands to show he didn't really know. 'I never asked her outright. Maybe because... I don't know if she could have explained it. At first I thought it was professional success. Boss of the company. Money. Then I thought it was a moving target, once she had one thing, it led to another. But later I thought she had father issues. The old man sort of disappeared, in her teens. He struggled... She didn't really want to talk about it, but that's the idea I got. She had this rage, at his weakness. So, I think her goal was to get him out of her system. His genes, in a way.'"
quote: "Griessel digested that before he asked, 'Who would she have opened the door for?'"
quote: "'For very few people. Her parents, her girl friends. For me. A few from work...'"
quote: "'Were there any of her colleagues who didn't like her?'"
quote: "'One never knows, with that bunch of lawyers. They are so obsessed with money, as long as she was valuable to them, they would like her.'"
quote: "'I didn't really know them. I was at a Christmas party, and we were invited to dinner with some of the directors once or twice, but then it was ten or twenty people. They are not really my sort.'"
quote: "'I just assumed, you know... I mean, this is the country we live in. I just assumed it was some black man who was stalking her, from the street, who waited until she opened the door. Murdered her because he could. That's what I thought.'"
quote: "At nine o'clock the sniper bought ten cans of red spray paint and two rolls of masking tape at Melkbos Hardware. He was nervous when he got out of the Audi A4, tormented by the vague fear that someone would suddenly point an accusing finger at him, and shout, 'That's him!'"
quote: "After that he bought another ten spray cans and two rolls of masking tape at Makro in Montague Gardens, and at a café in Blaauwberg Road he bought all the morning papers."
quote: "In his mind he composed emails to the police and the press over and over, but he couldn't find the right approach."
quote: "It would be twelve o'clock before he realised the paint was not enough."
quote: "Griessel drove out through Bonne Espérance's avenue of oaks, marvelling at a world where a big, strong, handsome and apparently intelligent man could blush blood red one minute when discussing intimate matters with a policeman. And the next minute, without blinking an eye, calmly admit to a racist prejudice."
quote: "And where did Roch get that nonsense about 'no wonder the crooks are taking over the country'? He heard and saw that more and more, the public idea that crime was out of control. It was simply not true, the statistics showed that, the SAPS was slowly winning. But that was just one more thing he blamed the media for, that misconception. Because it sold more papers."
quote: "Which brought him back to Carla. She didn't have the life experience to understand these things. She could easily get mixed up with the wrong sort."
quote: "As he drove through Stellenbosch, he couldn't contain it any more. He called her number."
quote: "'I'm driving through your town, so I thought I would call you.' Which was more or less the truth."
quote: "'I can't, I have to get back to Bellville.'"
quote: "'I've been telling everyone it's my pa who's doing the Sloet case.'"
quote: "'So, what's new?' One of Fritz's phrases, one he had never used with his daughter. He was certain she would smell a rat now."
quote: "'You mustn't work too hard.' He wanted to fish with, 'You should go out too,' but he knew that was one step too far. 'You should relax as well,' he said."
quote: "'Oh, don't worry, Pa, we do that a lot.'"
quote: "The sentence came out before he could stop it, 'You and the girls...?' The query disguised as much as possible."
quote: "That was not what he wanted to hear. 'Just tell those student guys your father carries a Z88 and there are a lot of shotguns in the police magazine...'"
quote: "The Directorate of Priority Crime Investigations' offices were in the old Revenue Services building in AJ West Street in Bellville. Griessel parked the BMW in the basement, between the other Hawks vehicles – the Golf GTIs, Isuzus, Nissan 4x4s, Tiidas, Ford Focuses, and the two large unmarked Ford Everests. He jogged up the stairs to the second floor. The SARS desks and cubicles were all still there. There were rumours that Public Works were going to redo the whole place for the Hawks within weeks. But if you were 'old school', you knew all about the promises of Public Works."
quote: "'We have a vehicle description,' the detective beside him said. 'Kia van. Looking for a match on the database, Kia owners and triple-two rifles.'"
quote: "Mbali looked up, saw Benny. 'They recovered enough fragments from the body of Constable Matthys last night. It's definitely triple-two. Problem is, most of the Kias are registered to companies. But we're hoping our vehicle is privately owned. You can't cut holes in your boss's van...'"
quote: "'What sort of person shoots policemen with a triple-two?' one of the detectives asked."
quote: "'Because he's a cunt,' whispered the one beside Griessel, but very quietly, so Mbali wouldn't hear."
quote: "Griessel wanted to agree, but his cellphone rang in his jacket pocket and he said, 'Sorry,' and walked out. He could see it was Cupido's number."
quote: "'Benna, you had better come. PCSI have found something weird. Very weird, pappie.'"
quote: "The PCSI minibuses were parked in front of the 36 on Rose apartment block in the Bo Kaap. The woman at security was grumpy when Griessel asked for access. He suspected she must have been up and down many times already today."
quote: "In the lift she said, 'The wireless people need to test that flat. When will you be done?'"
quote: "He looked, recognised the spots. Griessel ducked under the tape and stepped carefully. 'Luminol,' he said."
quote: "'Damn straight, pappie. Seems like Thick and Thin never thought to test – they saw the visible blood and thought that was all. But it wasn't.' Cupido addressed himself to a technician with a camera slung around his neck and said, 'Show him the photos.'"
quote: "The PCSI Forensics team gathered around. Griessel knew some of them. Others were new, and introduced themselves."
quote: "The one with the camera was Rabinowitz, young, crew cut, in a light blue overall. He turned the Canon 7D so that Griessel could see the little screen. He knew what to expect. The Luminol solution reacted with blood, and emitted a blue glow for thirty seconds only, which had to be captured on camera. What he saw was an underexposed photo, with a few dimly glowing blue smears."
quote: "'With soap and water,' said the technician. 'That is why we could still find the trace elements.'"
quote: "Griessel looked from the photo to the floor and back. The marker was less than a metre from where Hanneke Sloet's body had lain."
quote: "'The same thing happened in the kitchen. At the basin...' Cupido pointed at the kitchen sink. Griessel noticed that the little door below it had been unscrewed. It was leaning against the cupboards, wrapped in a plastic bag. 'But there are more trace elements, so there was more blood in the basin,' said Cupido."
quote: "'Look,' said the technician, and displayed another photo. The kitchen sink, with the same ghostly glow, but much more of it."
quote: "'It's her blood. Must be,' said Cupido. 'I mean, there's nothing else. Nowhere.'"
quote: "'Wollie is our spatter expert,' the technician said, pointing at one of his colleagues, slightly older, with a goatee. Wollie came and stood beside them. 'The visible blood is caused by the stab wound, and is very typical.' He indicated the reddish brown fan of fine blood spatters. 'That was from the stabbing action itself, the drops are between one point three and two millimetres large, that means a relatively fast attack speed of between two and five metres per second, which you would expect from sharp trauma of this kind. The shape and tails of the drops give us the angle and height of the stabbing, and the place the victim was standing.'"
quote: "Griessel nodded. He had heard the technique described many times in court."
quote: "Wollie pointed at the big pool of dried blood. 'This one shows no spatters, this is where she was lying, with the blood running from the wound through her clothes and onto the floor. The combination of the big pool and the spatters tells the whole story, that is precisely what you expect with a single stab wound. That is why the Luminol results are so strange.'"
quote: "'The first possibility would be his own blood. She might have wounded him. The main problem with that is the place we found it. It doesn't completely fit the scene. Vaughn says there were no defensive wounds or foreign blood on her clothes or hands. The other problem is the amount and concentration. It was relatively little to begin with. He spread it over a larger area while wiping it up, but I think it was relatively localised. A patch, not spatter. And because there is more blood rinsed off in the sink, that doesn't make sense either.'"
quote: "'Which means it may have been a bloody print. But there is no indication that he stepped in this blood. Both visible samples are uncontaminated. I don't think it could be a piece of clothing either. Let's say a jacket that had been spattered with blood that he put down. Clothes absorb blood. And our visible spatters show a complete pattern of the attack – no obstruction. All I can think of is that he put down the weapon itself. Because there would have been blood on it.'"
quote: "'Remember, he has this huge iron thing, and he wanted to bend down to feel for a pulse,' said Cupido."
quote: "'The other possibility is that he wanted to search her, or take something from her. So he put the weapon down to use both hands.'"
quote: "Griessel tried to envisage it. 'Did her dress have pockets?'"
quote: "'No. But her hand. Remember the crime-scene photos, her hand that was open like that?' asked Cupido."
quote: "'We think,' said Wollie the spatter man, 'he either wanted to make sure she was dead, or she might have been clutching something in her hand. And he must have put the weapon down, or maybe rested the point on the floor. And when he picked it up again, he saw the localised blood where it had rested on the floor. So he fetched a cloth to wipe it up, and rinsed the cloth in the kitchen. And then the weapon too. That would explain why there was more blood residue in the sink than on the floor.'"
quote: "'Wait,' said Griessel, still battling to visualise it all. 'After he stabbed her, he put the weapon down...'"
quote: "'And he did something else, and when he picked the weapon up again, he saw there was blood on the floor.'"
quote: "'Like an outline,' said Cupido. 'And he thought, no, that's a dead give-away.'"
quote: "'So he went to look for a cloth. Here. In the kitchen...'"
quote: "'In the cupboard under the sink,' said Rabinowitz. 'That's where her cleaning products are. We're taking the door to the lab. And the plastic bag that her cloths were in.'"
quote: "'He wiped the handle of the front door clean,' said Griessel sceptically. 'But maybe we'll get lucky.' He thought about the possibilities again. He said, 'When he was finished, he took the cloth with him. And the weapon.'"
quote: "'But what would he have taken from her?' He stared at the damp Luminol spot."
quote: "He went to buy a sandwich and a cool drink at Woolies Food in Mill Street, then fled to the peace of his flat, so he could think."
quote: "He sat at the small breakfast counter and ate, letting his thoughts loose, all the stuff that had been bottled up."
quote: "But rather that. Because when he recalled the photos of Hanneke Sloet's father, Willem, that expression of... defeat, of a man who had lost the battle in his attempt to be the person his wife wanted him to be. He wasn't prepared to go through that, he had enough trouble as it was. He had to protect and preserve what little dignity he still had – the thing that made Carla say, 'My father is handling the Sloet case.' Being a detective. Even though much of this world would look down on that. People like Roch, and Hannes Pruis who would 'not be threatened by a mere captain'. And surely someone like Hanneke Sloet too. He saw women like her in the Gardens Centre, pretty and well-off and sophisticated, all dolled up, all dressed up to the nines... When he walked past in his Mr Price clothes, with his cheap haircut and his booze-ravaged face, he simply did not exist for them. The only reason Alexa was involved with him was because of her damage, her weakness, she had no idea how much better she could do."
quote: "Sloet had worked so hard on the deal because it would open doors to new opportunities for making the gap wider. She had had an idea, a plan. For more power at the law firm, or, if they would not accede, to go it alone. To be a player, a deal maker. He couldn't say that to Alexa last night, but Sloet's hunger, in general, did not really pose a threat to anyone, if you thought about it. Silberstein Lamarque could just have said to her, 'Pack your bags, we're not interested'. And more likely they would have had the opposite reaction."
quote: "Which brought him to what Cupido had said, 'The question is, what did she have?'"
quote: "And the who and the what were somewhere in Hanneke Sloet's tendency, background and opportunity. That was what had instinctively led him back to Roch this morning, to ask more questions. That was why it was on his schedule to talk to her two best friends this afternoon. And with each of her colleagues who had worked with her on the big deal."
quote: "At ten past one he knocked on Prof Pagel's office door at the University of Stellenbosch's Health Sciences faculty next to the Tygerberg Hospital."
quote: "Prof Pagel, with his long, aristocratic face, sat behind the desk. As usual he was flamboyantly dressed. He was tanned and fit for his close to sixty years."
quote: "'Nikita,' said the pathologist as if he were genuinely happy to see Griessel. Pagel had been calling him 'Nikita' for thirteen years. He had given Griessel one look back then and said, 'I am sure that's what the young Khrushchev looked like.'"
quote: "'Come in, take a seat. And how was your evening with the rich and famous?'"
quote: "Pagel threw back his big head and laughed. And Benny, burning with shame, could only smile weakly, because he knew it would have been funny, if it weren't about himself."
quote: "'Let me tell you,' said Pagel once he had calmed down, 'about my great faux pas, Nikita. You know who Luciano Pavarotti was?'"
quote: "'Genuine, Nikita. The man gave me an astonished look, turned away and began to talk to someone else. By the time I realised the extent of my faux pas, it was too late. For months afterwards I still blushed and regretted it and reproached myself. But all you can really do is laugh. And know your intention was true. And still enjoy the delight of his voice.'"
quote: "Griessel felt the relief slowly spread through him. If something like that could happen to Phil Pagel, this man for whom he had such admiration..."
quote: "'Faux pas,' Pagel spelled the word. 'French. For making an idiot of yourself. It takes the sting out of the concept somewhat.'"
quote: "'Happens to all of us. But you're not here to listen to embarrassing stories, Nikita...' He pulled a thick file closer. 'As a consequence of your call I took another look at my Sloet notes. Reminds me of our assegai case a few years back. Do you remember, Artemis, the vigilante murderer?'"
quote: "'That was the last time I saw similar wound pathology, Nikita. Not identical. Similar. The single stab wound in Sloet is problematic, it offers much less data. So, any conclusion by definition must be speculative. But you're here because you want me to speculate.'"
quote: "'Prof, he brought this thing along with him. So it couldn't have been too big or too heavy.'"
quote: "'I can tell you the blade was definitely longer than twenty centimetres. But let's look at the wound location and the stab angle. A short weapon typically produces an angle of 130 degrees or more in the chest – the up- or downward stabbing action of a knife or a dagger, for maximum momentum. The Sloet stab angle is just less than a hundred degrees. Thus from slightly above. If you take the standard deviation for human height into account, it looks like a horizontal action. Again, like a sword. Which tells me it was a longer weapon. Forty centimetres or more. Even if the weapon were sixty or seventy centimetres long, according to the breadth and width and average weight of steel, it need not have weighed more than a kilogram...'"
quote: "'Forensically speaking it's safe, Nikita. Clever. No ballistic trail, no physical contact with the victim...'"
quote: "Griessel thought about it. Then he told Pagel about PCSI's latest discovery this morning, and the theory that she had been holding something in her hand."
quote: "'A keepsake, Prof,' said Griessel reluctantly, because it opened up a hornets' nest, the world of the serial killer, someone who liked to keep something from every victim."
quote: "'Indeed, Nikita. The memento. To take off the panties, he would have to put the weapon down.'"
quote: "He didn't want to be late for his half past two appointment with the two girl friends, so he phoned the DPCI office while he drove and asked to talk to Captain Philip van Wyk of IMC. He must get the possibility of a serial killer into the system, even though the evidence was slim. But the clean crime scene and the single wound could point to an organised, experienced serial killer. As far as he knew, they weren't investigating a similar modus operandi in the Cape."
quote: "He got van Wyk on the line at last. He could hear the Information Centre was busy, and explained hastily what he wanted."
quote: "'We will have to ask IPS in Pretoria to look nationally,' said van Wyk, referring to the Investigative Psychology Section. 'We don't believe there are locally related cases. It could take a while, but I will set the wheels in motion immediately. Listen, the people doing your graphs have come across something.'"
quote: "'I want to know if she insured any very valuable stuff. Jewels... I don't know, anything relatively small and worth a lot of money.'"
quote: "'A couple of possibles so far. CATS are following up now.'"
quote: "'Benny?' Fanie 'Fucked' Fick asked after a moment, his voice quiet and apologetic. His habitual tone ever since the humiliation of the Steyn case."
quote: "'Maybe. You know about the SMS Sloet sent the night of her death, around 21.52?'"
quote: "He had to think about that first. 'Yes... To Henry van Eeden, I think.'"
quote: "'That's right. We plotted van Eeden's number along with all the rest. And we found two calls from him to Sloet, later that night. The first was at 22.48, the second around 23.01. She didn't answer either of them, but I see the pathologist says the time of death was around 22.00, with two hours of play either side. So she could have been dead already...'"
quote: "'That's right. But now I must add, his first call registered on the Vodacom tower at Somerset West, the one at 22.48. And thirteen minutes later, at 23.01, the second call registered on the towers at Nyanga and Gugulethu. Seems he was on the N2, on the way to the city.'"
quote: "'That's the only funny thing we've picked up so far.'"
quote: "He stopped in front of the offices of Blue Oceans Productions in Prestwich Street where he was going to interview Sloet's two friends. He was a few minutes late, but he looked up Henry van Eeden's number on his cellphone first, and pressed call."
quote: "It rang only three times before the man answered. Griessel identified himself, van Eeden's voice was just as warm as it had been the day before. 'Afternoon, Captain. I'm glad you're phoning...'"
quote: "'Yesterday... After you left here yesterday, something kept bothering me. Something that Hanneke had said, I just couldn't place it, it is two months ago after all. It's relevant to what you said about a communist who might be involved.'"
quote: "'Late last night, I remembered what it was. On the twenty-second of December we had a short meeting, with representatives of all the big role players, just before Christmas. Just after we adjourned, Hanneke took a call on her phone. She seemed a little upset, so I asked her if everything was OK, and she said, yes, just an annoying Russian.'"
quote: "'That's right. But the Russians haven't been communists for a long time, that's why I didn't immediately make the connection. It might be irrelevant, but I thought I would mention it to you.'"
quote: "'Thank you, Mr van Eeden, we will see if we can find anything. I wonder if you could help me to understand something else.'"
quote: "'Our records say you phoned Hanneke Sloet twice, the night of her murder.'"
quote: "'That's right. I informed Sergeant Nxesi about it.' Van Eeden's tongue-clicking pronunciation of the Xhosa surname was perfect."
quote: "'I don't see a reference in the file. Can you tell me why you phoned her?'"
quote: "'But she sent the SMS before ten. You only phoned just before eleven...'"
quote: "'I only received it at about a quarter to eleven. I was a speaker at the BEE conference at the Lord Charles...'"
quote: "'That's right. You know how it is, you turn your phone off when you're talking. I finished about half past ten, and switched my phone back on when I walked to my car. That's when I got her SMS. And so I phoned her back.'"
quote: "'I can't remember the exact words, but it was about the report she had sent. She wanted me to look at it urgently.'"
quote: "'I wanted to tell her I would only be able to look at it the following day.'"
quote: "'That's right. I thought she might be in the bath. So I phoned again, on the way home.'"
quote: "'I didn't think it was necessary. She would have seen the missed calls.'"
quote: "Aldri de Koker was plump and soft, with a maternal air about her. 'Hanneke and I were roomies at varsity,' she said."
quote: "'We did Private Law together in second year,' said Samantha ('call me Sam') Grobler, the film producer. They sat in the reception room of Blue Ocean Productions, all black leather and glass, framed film posters against the wall. Grobler was tall and very slim, with high, prominent cheekbones. The tightly fitting blouse showed a breast measurement completely out of keeping with her slimness. Griessel wondered whether she had also had a boob job."
quote: "'It feels as though we always knew each other,' said de Koker."
quote: "'You both talked to Hanneke on the eighteenth?' Griessel asked."
quote: "'Even if it was just for a minute or two,' said de Koker."
quote: "'What sort of work do you do?' Griessel asked her."
quote: "'And she makes money like it's going out of fashion,' said Grobler. Through the glass of the big coffee table Griessel could see her long slender legs in tight, bleached denim. And the high-heeled sandals. He struggled to reconcile these two – the plump de Koker in her wide red skirt, loose white blouse and flat shoes, and her girl friend with the accentuated, sexy slimness."
quote: "'Boo Radley's,' they said in unison, looked at each other and shared an empathetic smile. 'Boo Radley's?'"
quote: "'It's a pub and bistro,' said Grobler. 'In Hout Street.'"
quote: "'We still order a Corona for Hanneke...' They talked rapidly, without pauses between each other's sentences, as though each knew what the other was going to say. Griessel had to concentrate to keep up."
quote: "'It was what we did, on a Tuesday,' said de Koker. 'Confirm Wednesday evening.'"
quote: "'It was big. Hanneke's first Boo evening since she moved.'"
quote: "'She wouldn't want us to think about it like that,' said Grobler."
quote: "'Did she say anything about the apartment? About the move, or the builders...?'"
quote: "'She just said she didn't know why she'd waited so long before moving to the city.'"
quote: "'We were still discussing who she was going to invite to the house-warming...'"
quote: "'The estate agents. They promised her she would have wireless when she moved in, but it still wasn't up and running.'"
quote: "'Did she have any very valuable possessions in the apartment? Jewels, that sort of thing...?'"
quote: "'The painting. In her sitting room. It's an Aalbers.'"
quote: "'It's an Aalbers,' said de Koker again, as if that explained everything."
quote: "'Something about her spare key? About who she gave it to?'"
quote: "De Koker lifted a large raffia handbag off the floor, put it on her lap, put in her hand and almost immediately brought out a key holder – a small pink bear, on a ring with a single key. 'Here it is.'"
quote: "'What?' asked de Koker. 'Nobody asked me anything about it.'"
quote: "'On the fourth. The day after she moved in. She phoned me and asked if I wanted to come around. Sam was still on location...'"
quote: "'She asked me if I would keep the key. She always used to give it to Mister Big...'"
quote: "'Wait, please,' said Griessel, hands in the air. 'Mister Big?'"
quote: "He saw the women exchange a meaningful glance, as though he had failed a test. 'We called Egan Mister Big,' said de Koker."
quote: "'And apparently not without reason,' said Grobler suggestively. He suspected she generally flirted a little with men."
quote: "'And she told you about her and Roch, in December?'"
quote: "'Of course,' said Grobler. 'We didn't have any secrets from each other.'"
quote: "'A girl has to do what a girl has to do.'"
quote: "Griessel's cellphone rang. He wanted to explain to them that he was JOC leader, he had to take the call, but then he realised how big-headed that would sound, so he just said, 'Excuse me,' stood up, took the phone, and walked towards the door."
quote: "'Griessel,' he said as he went out into the passage and closed the door behind him, though his thoughts were still inside."
quote: "'Hannes Pruis told me to email you Sloet's diary,' said a man's voice, hurried, hoarse and somewhat fuzzy. 'But we don't have your address.'"
quote: "'I'll see you in an hour,' said Griessel. He couldn't remember asking Pruis to send her diary..."
quote: "'It's too much to print out, we would rather send it.'"
quote: "Griessel shook his head, put the phone away, and went back in. 'Excuse me,' he said to the two women. 'Where were we?'"
quote: "'Oh. Yes. So she told you about her and Egan. In December?'"
quote: "'And as far as she was concerned it was just a one-off...'"
quote: "He managed to change the instinctive fricative to 'faux pas' again, took the phone out of his pocket, and stood up."
quote: "'You don't need to go outside, we understand,' said Grobler."
quote: "He could see on the screen it was the DPCI. He didn't want to take a call now, he wanted to hear about Hannes Pruis, his lifebuoy after their flood of words had washed away his spare key theory. But he would have to answer. 'Excuse me,' he told the women. 'Griessel,' he said into the instrument, halfway between his chair and the door."
quote: "'Benny, this is Fanie Fick of IMC. Did you just receive a phone call?'"
quote: "'Solomon. The shooter. It's the same phone he used to call Milnerton station yesterday."
quote: "And then he looked guiltily into the eyes of the plump, motherly Aldri de Koker."
quote: "'He called the provincial office switchboard first, fifteen minutes ago,' said Fick. 'They can't tell us who he spoke to. No logs, too many calls. We were caught napping, it was so unexpected, but then we knew he was on the air again. What did he say to you?'"
quote: "'He wanted my email address. He said Hannes Pruis wanted to send Hanneke Sloet's diary.' So the shooter knew about Pruis, Griessel realised."
quote: "'Yes, pl—' He remembered the photo of Carla and the muscle man that Fritz had sent. 'No, wait,' he said, 'I'm coming.'"
quote: "'He phoned from the city, Benny. The call was too short to triangulate. If he phones again, try to keep him on the line.'"
quote: "'OK. I'm coming. Give me...' He still wanted to hear the story of Hannes Pruis and Hanneke Sloet. '... forty minutes.'"
quote: "He put the phone away. Both women were sitting and watching him intently. It took a moment to gather his thoughts. 'Hannes Pruis?' he said to Grobler and de Koker. 'He and Hanneke had an affair?'"
quote: "'You asked if there was a man in her life,' said de Koker."
quote: "'Hannes Pruis made sure that he was the only man in her life,' said Grobler."
quote: "'Slave driver,' said de Koker. 'Little man. Jealous of Mister Big, he made sure they didn't have any time together.'"
quote: "'But did he do anything? I mean, did he harass her?'"
quote: "'And Pruis just had the standing,' said de Koker. 'You should have heard him at the memorial service.'"
quote: "'We had to put up with that. And Mister Big. That's why they broke up.'"
quote: "'Not in the Mister Big sense of the word,' said Grobler."
quote: "'That means \"no, absolutely not\",' de Koker explained. 'Except that he made her work too hard.'"
quote: "Griessel breathed out, as if he had survived a sprint. 'Thank you,' he said."
quote: "'Faux pas?' Grobler asked. 'Is that some sort of police code?'"
quote: "He knew everything was happening too fast, he had to keep his wits about him. In the BMW he first phoned Cupido and asked if he would go to the law firm straight away and supervise the questioning of personnel."
quote: "'I found the spare key, Vaughn. She gave it to one of her friends. Aldri de Koker.'"
quote: "'Let's make sure. Ask about fights, jealousy, office politics, affairs... Who would be angry if she set up on her own? Oh, and, did she have anything valuable in her apartment, something that might have belonged to the lawyers? Anything. Documents... I don't know, Vaughn, something that might have had great value.'"
quote: "'OK. The whole shebang,' said Cupido. 'I'm on my way.'"
quote: "Griessel put on the BMW's lights and siren and drove to Bellville."
quote: "But he was calm. Shot a policeman dead yesterday, today he was calm. And cheeky."
quote: "What did he want to send? Why now? He had only used John Afrika's email address up till now."
quote: "There was something else, a note that he felt he should write down. And now he couldn't recall it, those women had talked a hole in his head."
quote: "His cellphone rang again. It was Colonel Nyathi. 'Benny, we're having a meeting in half an hour, in the brig's office.'"
quote: "He deleted the one from Fritz after one last look at the picture of Carla and Etzebeth. Then he carried his laptop down to IMC."
quote: "There was no longer the frenetic activity of this morning, only the IMS personnel at their work stations, concentrating. He put his laptop down on Fanie Fick's table. 'He hasn't sent anything yet,' said Griessel."
quote: "'I know. We're watching the mail server. Put your laptop here and log in. I'll keep an eye on it.' With his apologetic attitude and sad eyes, like a bloodhound."
quote: "'Thanks,' said Griessel, and looked for a wall socket. It was hard for him to look at Fanie Fucked. As if he saw how he'd end up."
quote: "'We have more or less all the names and numbers of the builders of 36 on Rose,' Fick said. 'Plus the removals, and security. Her Vodacom records for the last six months of last year are coming soon.' He looked at his watch. 'I should be able to start running the match at about eight o'clock.'"
quote: "Fick shook his head. 'Chances are good that he stole the Kia. They can't find anything.'"
quote: "Griessel opened his email, and turned the screen so that Fick could see. 'We still don't have Sloet's cellphone records for December?'"
quote: "'Can you see if there is anyone with a Russian surname who phoned her on the twenty-second?'"
quote: "'I have to go to a meeting...' He took out his notebook and pen. 'If you get a chance – I just want to check someone's criminal record...'"
quote: "'Sure,' said Fick. Eager to help. To be part of a case again."
quote: "'There's no rush...' Griessel wrote down the name and surname, tore out the page."
quote: "'Thanks, Fanie.' It was an effort to keep the pity from his voice."
quote: "There was a moment that morning, with the sickening smell of the red spray paint in his nose and the uncertainty gnawing at him like a slow cancer, that the sniper was ready to pack it all in."
quote: "There was huge relief in the idea. Just walk away. Drive the Chana and take the rifle and the cellphone and the wig and the clothes and go and pour petrol over them. Set it all on fire and just walk away."
quote: "He put down the spray can, untied the rag from over his mouth, pulled off the gloves, and sat down on the garage floor, his head between his knees."
quote: "After a while he pictured himself like that, defeated and dejected, and it was too much to bear. He could not let it end here, because then they would have won."
quote: "Slowly he crawled back up the slope of despair, warmed his hands over the glowing embers of old fires. And then the plan came to him, the strategy, the knowledge that the best defence was attack. That he held the trump cards. He just had to play them right."
quote: "He used the Peninsula telephone directory, and wrote down the possible numbers."
quote: "He considered his timing and the fact that the origin of cellphone calls could be determined. He drove the Audi into the city, to the big parking lot at the Waterfront. There he took a deep breath, steadied pen and paper on his knee, and called the SAPS Provincial Office. He asked for the Administrative Department. A woman with a coloured accent answered."
quote: "'Who am I talking to now?' he asked in an irritable voice."
quote: "'Colonel knows I can't give that out over the phone.'"
quote: "'Sergeant, what do you want me to do? If I don't have the correct information, the Captain will not be paid at the end of the month. Is that what you want?'"
quote: "'Couldn't Colonel ask the Captain himself?' she tried to divert him."
quote: "'Benny is busy with the Sloet case, Veronica. Do you really want me to bother him with such nonsense?'"
quote: "'Let me give you the address I have, and then you tell me if it is the one you have.'"
quote: "He held his breath, unsure whether his gamble would work, aware of the ticking of the clock, that the length of this call must be limited. She hesitated, and he tried another approach."
quote: "'Sergeant, I understand it's not your fault. But please help me – you know how it is if someone doesn't get their pay cheque.'"
quote: "She sighed at last, then asked, resigned, 'What is his personnel number, Colonel?'"
quote: "Then he heard her typing on a keyboard. And she said, 'There is only one Benjamin Griessel. Number 128, Nelson's Mansions, Vriende Street, Gardens?'"
quote: "'That's not what we have.' He scribbled it down hastily, delighted with the success of his little ploy. Then he made another mistake. 'And his email?'"
quote: "He scrabbled for an answer. 'We have to remove the old one.'"
quote: "'Is this the correct cell number?' He gave her a fictitious one."
quote: "'No,' she said, and slowly read out the correct one."
quote: "He ended the call, switched off his phone, and, with the warm glow of success, drove to Sea Point, to change his location. He parked on the other side of the swimming pool, in the area that looked out over the flat, windless summer sea. He phoned the detective. In that moment, when the man answered, there was a separation from reality, and he was curious to hear his own voice. Would it tremble, would it hesitate?"
quote: "The detective, the Benny Griessel he had seen in the news photos, sounded unsettled. Absent. And that gave him pleasure – it was the result of the pressure he brought to bear, his actions, his campaign. He wrote down the email address, put the cellphone down, took out the battery. He put everything in the glove compartment and drove home before the rush hour could detain him. To write the email. And he knew this tranquillity he had found would stay with him."
quote: "Tonight, in the dark, he would go and reconnoitre the area around Vriende Street and Nelson's Mansions. In the Audi, and on foot."
quote: "Because that was where he wanted to fire his next shot."
quote: "They were all sitting around the big table in Musad Manie's office – the brigadier himself, Zola Nyathi, Werner du Preez of CATS, Philip van Wyk of IMC, Cloete of Public Relations, Mbali and Griessel."
quote: "'He has a hunting rifle at his disposal, scope and ammunition, and therefore most likely a gun licence. He has the means and space to adapt to his specific purpose. He has access to the Internet, knowledge of anonymous email servers, quotes in Latin, and has relatively good language skills. All that, along with the timing of the police attacks, indicates to me a white collar worker who is not unemployed."
quote: "'He is religious, but I don't think he belongs to an extremist or charismatic group. To tell the truth, I don't think he is in any way a community or group person. He sees himself as the white knight, the lone wolf, the solitary protector of moral values and justice. There are no psychoses, but most likely a personality disorder – perhaps a kind of Messiah complex.'"
quote: "'I think the email of February twenty-seventh is important, because it tells us he experienced pressure and tension. I can speculate and say it was because he was announcing himself to the media with that message, but things didn't play out exactly as he expected. He missed, but it may have been because he was nearly discovered, that he had some kind of narrow escape. You might well look into that. A speeding fine? Ran a red light? Or perhaps it was merely a case of his initial motivation decreasing, so that he began to wonder about the moral justification behind it all. He clearly knows the difference between right and wrong – the Bible verses are good evidence – but to shoot someone in reality is a traumatic experience. What I am trying to say, is that he is not a hundred per cent stable. But highly motivated – it takes an enormous amount of faith in your cause to prepare a vehicle and weapon, to wait in ambush and shoot a policeman. And that combination makes him dangerous. The dilemma is, the more policemen he shoots, the less he has to lose. Mbali, you asked me this morning to take the calibre and the missed shot into account...'"
quote: "'If you consider the calibre along with the missed shot and the stress of the email, you can deduce that he has not had specialised military training. I know men of the apartheid era all did military service, but this man was most likely in a support unit, and did not have combat experience.'"
quote: "'You know it's all conjecture, Mbali, but it could mean that he has knowledge of the nature of police investigations. He may have worked for, or with the SAPS. There is also the fact that he is specifically shooting members of the Service. It could be that he has a grudge. Probably not a policeman, if we look at the calibre and the bad shooting, but you never know. I would look at dishonourable discharges of administrative personnel or reservists, people who were arrested or investigated for misconduct.'"
quote: "'I'm sorry, but that's the reality,' the forensic psychologist said. 'If he has a grudge, it could have taken years to progress this far.'"
quote: "'Ilse, this is Musad Manie. The shooter phoned Captain Benny Griessel directly to get his email address...'"
quote: "Manie looked at Griessel. 'About half past three,' he said. 'From somewhere in the city.'"
quote: "'The question I have,' said Manie, 'is whether we should try to start a conversation with him through Benny?'"
quote: "There was a long silence over the line before she answered. 'That is a very difficult one, brigadier. All the usual rules of interrogation apply. You want him to do all the talking, so your communication must be very short and cryptic. It's almost like hostage negotiation, you want to keep rephrasing what he says in order to draw him out. But in this case he's sitting safely behind his anonymity, he has time to think everything through before he answers an email.'"
quote: "'Ilse, Werner du Preez of CATS. It doesn't seem as though our search for the Kia is going to produce anything. We have to assume it is one of the three that were stolen in the past few months and not recovered...'"
quote: "'Colonel, with respect, I would be most surprised. Middle-aged white collar workers are practically never car thieves. They just don't have the skills...'"
quote: "'But there is a very good chance that the rifle was also stolen,' said Mbali. 'We have eliminated almost all the legal owners.'"
quote: "'Let me think a minute...' said Ilse Brody. Silence in the room while they waited for her response. Then she said, 'As we all know, nothing is impossible. But it really does not fit with anything else. My best guess would be someone close to law enforcement. Perhaps a rifle that was handed in to the police? An impounded van? I don't know...'"
quote: "'What will he do if we go to the media with the description of the vehicle?' du Preez asked."
quote: "'I wouldn't recommend it. He will just change vehicles. And naturally, every Kia on the road would panic the public...'"
quote: "'That's what I thought. And then there is the possibility of copycats...'"
quote: "'I don't think copycats are very likely in this case. As you know, Colonel, it happens mostly with economic crime in this country.'"
quote: "After the meeting was over, Griessel walked to his office and phoned Cupido."
quote: "'Nearly finished, but it's the three wise monkeys, Benna. Hear and speak and see no evil, they were this happy band of lawyer brothers and sisters all working together in paradise.'"
quote: "That was the way it usually went. He told Cupido of his brief phone conversation with the shooter, and Captain Ilse Brody's theory of a professional fringe figure. 'He knew her, Vaughn, and he knew Pruis. More and more I think he's in a corner at Silbersteins. Ask them if they know about such a man, in his late forties. Loner. A lurker, bad tempered and quiet and arrogant, with a superior attitude, that he's better than them.'"
quote: "'These are lawyers, Benna, they all think they are better than the rest. But I get the picture. I'll ask.'"
quote: "'I want to hold a JOC meeting at six o'clock. Will you be able to make it?'"
quote: "He phoned Alexa. She answered immediately, a little anxiously. 'Don't tell me you're on your way already.'"
quote: "'I'm not allowed to say.' There was a mischievous note in her voice. 'Will you phone before you come?'"
quote: "'She is, and she will stay until just before you come.'"
quote: "He heard Ella say something in the background, and then both women laughed conspiratorially. But before he could ask what it was about, Fick appeared in the door, his bloodhound face excited for the first time in months."
quote: "'Benny, you better come. The shooter has sent you an email...'"
quote: "They crowded around the screen to read it. Griessel noted their attention and focus. He thought, the shooter bastard had them just where he wanted."
quote: "'He is pretty desperate to regain the moral high ground,' said Mbali."
quote: "'New verses,' said Brigadier Manie. 'Now he wants to inherit the land.'"
quote: "'And the same Latin,' said Manie. 'That's all he knows. But Ilse was right. He blames everyone but himself.'"
quote: "There were thirty-seven people in the big parade room on the ground floor."
quote: "'Do we have news, Philip?' Griessel asked Captain van Wyk of IMC."
quote: "Van Wyk shook his head. 'We looked at Sloet's short-term insurance policy. There were no valuable items specified. Just the usual. Household contents and car.'"
quote: "'Nothing in her apartment, nothing in her blood,' said Griessel."
quote: "'People neglect to specify valuables,' said Nyathi. 'Grill the four with criminal records, really turn up the heat. If an alibi looks just a little shaky, you come to me right away, and we'll get a search warrant. Are we posting people at their homes, to make sure they don't get their buddies to offload evidence?'"
quote: "'We're working with the uniform branches, sir,' said the Violent Crimes detective. 'All the premises are secure.'"
quote: "'It could be the work,' said Griessel. 'Her friends said in the last year she had much less free time.'"
quote: "He thanked van Wyk, and asked Cupido whether the interrogations at Silbersteins had produced anything. Vaughn stole the limelight with his usual witticisms about the character, pomp and circumstance of lawyers. He said they had looked at everything – even Sloet's access card and keys to the office building – and there was nothing valuable missing. 'And the shrink's profile of an obnoxious recluse didn't pan out. Pruis the Ace told me they don't appoint people like that.'"
quote: "When he emerged from the meeting and switched his phone back on, there was a voicemail. He listened. It was General Afrika. 'Benny, I see the scoundrel now has your email too. Just wanted to know whether he has sent you anything else.'"
quote: "Before he called back, the Violent Crimes group brought in the first of four suspects with criminal records – the plumber's assistant. Shortly after that the packer from the removals company and the two construction workers arrived."
quote: "A duet of experienced detectives questioned each one separately in a DPCI office, while another two stood by to take calls and check alibis in cooperation with the SAPS stations. Nyathi himself drove to KFC to buy cold drinks and a few buckets of chicken. They ate and worked without stopping."
quote: "Griessel walked from room to room listening. His heart sank, little by little, as the innocence of one suspect after the other was confirmed."
quote: "At a quarter to eleven he walked to Manie's office. The commanding officer was on the phone, but beckoned Griessel to enter. Benny sat and listened to Manie soothingly bring the Lieutenant General in Pretoria up to date."
quote: "'I know the media are having a field day, General... No, I didn't watch the TV news... I understand, General. The whole unit is involved, but... No, General, we have no excuses... I assure you, we are doing our absolute best...' All said with stoic patience, until he at last put the receiver softly and carefully down on its cradle."
quote: "'You have nothing to be sorry about, Benny.' Manie wearily wiped his forehead, the first sign Griessel had seen that the pressure was getting to him."
quote: "'The men with records, Brigadier... We couldn't find anything. They're all clean.'"
quote: "'Yes, Brigadier. She wouldn't have opened the door to any of them.'"
quote: "'And she would have locked the door. In that half empty building.'"
quote: "Manie stood up and picked up his jacket. 'In other words, IMC is our last hope,' he said."
quote: "Again the hand wiping the brow, eyebrows to crown. 'I want you to know I think you have done excellent work so far, Benny. It makes no difference what the general says.'"
quote: "Manie gripped his arm. 'Come on, let's go home. Tomorrow is another day.'"
quote: "Griessel fetched the case file and his jacket from his office, walked down the silent passage to the lift. He heard hurried footsteps from the stairwell side."
quote: "He turned. Fick trotted towards him. 'There's another email, Benny. From the shooter.'"
quote: "'That's the thing. He didn't write anything. It's just a photo.'"
quote: "It was a black-and-white photograph, just the head and shoulders of a white man in a black jacket of perfect cut, white shirt and tie. His face was slightly angled to the right, his eyes turned away from the camera. He grinned with small, sharp teeth, like a shark. There were lines around his mouth and eyes, he looked about fifty-something. The hair was combed straight back, with the help of gel or hair oil maybe, so that his forehead stretched high above the dark eyebrows. He was clean-shaven."
quote: "'Never seen him before,' said Griessel. 'Didn't he write anything with this?'"
quote: "'Nothing. He sent it to you, Captain, and General Afrika. And he saved the photo as \"MK\".'"
quote: "'It looks like it is scanned out of a newspaper or something, and then he saved it as a jpeg file with the name \"MK\".'"
quote: "He thought about it. Could it be a banker or a businessman in this suit? Maybe Boshigo knew him. 'Let's email the photo to Bones.'"
quote: "'I can MMS it,' said Fick, sat down and tapped at the mouse and keyboard."
quote: "'I'll phone him now,' said Griessel, and called Boshigo's number."
quote: "'The man who never sleeps,' said Bones when he answered, the sound of a television programme in the background."
quote: "'Looks like a conman from the fifties,' said Bones. 'Or a loan shark...'"
quote: "He looked closely at the photo again. Bones was right. There was something reminiscent of a bygone era. Was it the hairstyle?"
quote: "It had been sent to him and John Afrika. Maybe the general knew who it was. He called Afrika's number. It went straight to voicemail. He didn't leave a message, he would try again tomorrow. Then he called Nyathi and Manie, to inform them of the latest developments."
quote: "When he had finished, he asked Fanie Fick, 'Will you let me know if anything else comes in?'"
quote: "'Oh. Yes... the one I am looking at is around twenty,' said Griessel."
quote: "'OK. That would be Carel Ignatius Etzebeth. And he's clean. No record.'"
quote: "'Thank you very much,' said Griessel, and he had to hide his relief."
quote: "'His cellphone number has been RICAed. Do you want me to plot it?'"
quote: "That was the only way he could find out how seriously involved Carla was with the Neanderthal. But it would be misuse of the Hawks' time and manpower. 'You are busy, it's probably not worth the effort,' he said."
quote: "'It's no trouble, Captain. I have to wait for the other data to be processed anyway.'"
quote: "In the basement, beside the BMW, he checked his watch. It was half past eleven. He phoned Alexa to tell her he was on his way."
quote: "'Yes, Alexa is fine. But she's fallen asleep. Don't worry about it, she was quite tired after the day's shopping and all. I don't think we should wake her.'"
quote: "'It's OK. We watched the news, we know you're having a hard time. Just between you and me, she bought this very sexy dress, and then we prepared a dinner for you, with candles and everything. And Alexa really can't cook – the duck is so tough, you can barely chew it. But she wanted to do that for you, to say thank you. I think she hoped tonight... you know...' A conspiratorial suggestion in her voice."
quote: "'Use your imagination, Benny. Anyway, I am going to sleep here at her place tonight, we'll talk again tomorrow... Good luck, Benny.'"
quote: "'I'm...' he said, but the line was already dead."
quote: "He lay on his back in the darkness, the sheets and blankets kicked off in the heat. He knew he was going to battle to sleep, even though he was back in his flat, even though the sounds were familiar and soothing – his pawnshop fridge downstairs, the TV of the woman next door, and the hum of traffic in Annandale Street. Now that the crazy day was over, his rage at the shooter overwhelmed him, slowly, like a tide coming in."
quote: "It was only during the reading of the last email, in the company of his colleagues in front of the screen, that he really began to hate the fucker. The cunt who phoned him, who sat on the other end of the line and lied to him while he struggled and fought and scrambled and ran from one false hope to the next. Not just him. Mbali Kaleni had looked lost tonight, dead tired and despairing, because nothing was working out. And Musad Manie's voice when he spoke to the general in Pretoria... There was a hopelessness there for the first time, as though he knew they were worn out. And this thing had scarcely begun."
quote: "And then he sent that meaningless, self-glorifying, apologetic email giving the SAPS 'grace'. Like a fucking lord."
quote: "What kind of person phoned the police to stop a robbery, and then shot one of them dead? It was the lowest form of cowardice."
quote: "If he truly believed the SAPS were protecting someone, why didn't he tell the press? Why didn't he reveal his information and suspicions and accusations to the media? He must know they would descend on it like vultures and try to rip up the carcass of the SAPS."
quote: "He knew it wasn't just the shooter, it was the whole Sloet case. The frustration, the pressure, trying everything, getting nowhere. Running in circles, powerless. He hated this kind of case where there was just nothing – working like a blind man in the dark."
quote: "And then the shooter came and made everything even more difficult. The screaming injustice of it all seared through him, stoking his hatred."
quote: "So strong was the feeling of rage that he wanted to get up and get out the old laptop that he'd bought on a police auction a while back, and pound away on the keyboard until he'd sent the email off, and he wondered suddenly, where did it come from, all this fury?"
quote: "He sighed, shifted the pillow, turned on his side. It came from yesterday evening. When he had sat and told Alexa about his day."
quote: "The first time in his life. He had never done that when he was married to Anna. He had wanted to keep the death and killing away from her and the children, had wanted one place that was normal and unspoiled."
quote: "And last night, he realised – fleetingly and reluctantly – it was a kind of relief, the offloading of experiences and frustrations. A sort of release, to tell someone. For the first time he truly understood what Doc Barkhuizen meant by 'don't internalise your work'."
quote: "If he had shared all that with Anna, ten to one he would never have started drinking, and ten to one Anna would not have left him, and he would be sleeping curled around her back in their marriage bed tonight, without the frustration and hatred that he was feeling."
quote: "And he'd thought he was over the whole divorce thing."
quote: "Life was never simple. It didn't help at all to reason like that. Especially not today, because he had had enough."
quote: "Today, in Manie's office, after the conference call with Ilse Brody, the psychologist, Cloete had read them some things off the Internet. People reacting to the shooter news reports, tweeting and Facebooking, and they all sat there feeling the crying injustice of it all, because there was only scorn for them."
quote: "And he had no option, he had to put up with it. Because that was all he was. A policeman. He couldn't do anything else. And he didn't want to. But fuck knows, if you looked ahead and only saw trouble, then you wondered, was it all worth it?"
quote: "And he had thought maybe he could talk to Alexa about it tonight. Maybe it would help to get some of the stuff out of his head."
quote: "Alexa, who had bought a sexy dress and cooked him dinner and lit candles."
quote: "And then fallen asleep, because the shooter had fucked up his whole evening."
quote: "Tonight that dream might have become reality. If it wasn't for the shooter."
quote: "The first turning point came at half past five in the morning, when they phoned Griessel."
quote: "He woke up suddenly from a deep sleep, fumbled and fumbled again for the cellphone on his bedside cupboard, knocked it to the floor. He eventually got hold of it, kneeling on all fours on the carpet. 'Hello?' His mouth was dry and his voice hoarse."
quote: "'Benny, I'm so sorry to wake—' said van Wyk of IMC."
quote: "Griessel straightened up, sat down on the bed. 'Have you found something?'"
quote: "'The guy in the photo. He's a Russian. And he knew Sloet.'"
quote: "'A Russian.' Henry van Eeden had been right. 'Who is he?'"
quote: "'Makar Kotko,' he savoured the foreign name. 'Where does he fit in?'"
quote: "'Benny, the brigadier and Nyathi are on their way too. The situation is a bit sensitive. I don't want to say too much over the phone...'"
quote: "They stared at the photograph in disbelief, printed out on plain A4 paper. The resolution was not very good. Makar Kotko, just as he appeared in the shooter's photo, but now in the wider context of three other people. Kotko was in the middle, shaking the hand of the man beside him. Two others, on either end, looking on smiling."
quote: "'That's why I called you so early,' said van Wyk."
quote: "'It was the right thing,' said Manie. He looked old, the lines on his face cut deep this morning."
quote: "'That's the Youth League ou?' Griessel asked, and pointed at the man shaking hands with Kotko, because he wasn't entirely sure."
quote: "'Secretary General of the ANC Youth League,' said Nyathi dumbfounded. 'The motor-mouth...'"
quote: "'So who is Kotko?' Manie asked, and then held up his hand. 'No, first explain to me how you got hold of this photo.'"
quote: "Griessel knew what he meant. It was preparation, so that Manie had an answer ready for his superiors when the circus began."
quote: "'Brigadier, we only began researching him just after five this morning, so we haven't got much. His full name is Makar Vladovich Kotko. He is a Russian citizen, and a director of ZIC. Zoloto Investment Corporation. It is a South African company – they have very little information on their website, they seem to be consultants. But ZIC is a full affiliate of MZ. That stands for Magadan Zoloto, or Magadan Gold, a Russian mining company.'"
quote: "'What is he doing in this photo with Baloyi?' Manie asked in a tone of voice that sounded as though he didn't really want to know the answer."
quote: "Manie looked at Griessel. 'Gariep is part of the whole BEE set-up?'"
quote: "Brigadier Manie read the news report, then looked at the photo again, for a long time, and poker-faced. 'How do we know the shooter isn't messing around with us again?' he asked at last."
quote: "'We don't know. But it looks like Kotko is around fifty years old. He is definitely out of the Russian communist era,' said van Wyk."
quote: "'And he knew Sloet well enough to have her cellphone number,' said Griessel. 'She wasn't the sort of woman who would just hand it out.'"
quote: "'ZIC's offices are in Sandton. According to their website. We have requested Kotko's cellphone records. We will have to see if he was in the Cape at the time of Sloet's death.'"
quote: "'What worries me,' said Nyathi, 'is why the shooter says the SAPS is protecting Kotko. And then sends us a photo cropped from a Youth League meeting.'"
quote: "Manie sighed. 'It's a minefield, and we will have to tread extremely carefully. Benny, get hold of Bones. He'll have to come and help.'"
quote: "'We will have to tell Mbali as well, Brigadier. Because somewhere between the Russian and Sloet, is the shooter.'"
quote: "The second turning point came at half past six, when van Wyk walked into Griessel's office. His eyes were red from lack of sleep. He put a few sheets of paper on the desk and said, 'Kotko may have connections with the Russian Mafia.'"
quote: "'Faux pas,' said Griessel and scribbled frantic notes in his book."
quote: "Griessel said, 'We must take it to Oom Skip.' 'Uncle' or rather, Colonel Skip Scheepers of the Hawks' Organised Crime Group was past his retirement age, but the DPCI had asked him to stay on because of his encyclopaedic knowledge of international gangs."
quote: "'I've phoned Oom Skip already. He and Bones are going to look at all this.'"
quote: "Colonel Zola Nyathi, with a severe expression and a curt, 'Please come with me', fetched Griessel and walked to Brigadier Manie's office."
quote: "When they walked in, General Afrika looked up from where he was sitting. Griessel could see the aversion and disappointment, as though Afrika did not want him there. The first thought that came to mind, considering Nyathi and Afrika's attitudes, was that they had found out that he had misused the IMC system to spy on the Neanderthal. His heart sank."
quote: "Griessel greeted them, and tried to think up some excuses. He and Nyathi took their seats, on either side of Afrika."
quote: "'General, please repeat what you told me and Colonel Nyathi,' said Manie."
quote: "It was a while before Afrika responded. With his eyes on the floor he said, 'I know Kotko.'"
quote: "Those words were not what he had expected. Griessel nearly blurted out, 'Excuse me?'"
quote: "Afrika made a small gesture with his hand. 'I want it on record that I had no idea that Kotko had any contact with Sloet. I want it on record that I did not know he is the communist that the shooter was referring to. And I want it on record that I shared this information voluntarily.'"
quote: "'Very well, General. Please tell us how you came to know Kotko.'"
quote: "Emotions came and went across John Afrika's face. 'People make mistakes, Musad,' he said. 'We all make mistakes...'"
quote: "Afrika put a hand in his jacket and took out a folded sheet of paper. He unfolded it, looked at it, took a deep breath, and said seriously, as though he were testifying in court, 'On the morning of Thursday twenty-third September last year I received a call from a member of the Ministerial Committee. That person—'"
quote: "'Yes. That person asked me to be of assistance with a request from a Mr Kotko—'"
quote: "'The person asked me to help with a request from this Kotko, who was entirely unknown to me at the time. Shortly thereafter I received a call from Kotko, who invited me to lunch with him that afternoon. I did so. Kotko told me how many of the people in government he knew from the struggle days. And that he was a businessman now living in Johannesburg, and investing in the economy. Then he asked me to help two of his friends. These two...' Afrika consulted the paper in his hand '... were Fedor Vazov and Lev Grigoryev, who had been arrested the previous night, September twenty-second, by the Table View station after a complaint of assault in a nightclub. They were still being detained. Kotko said he believed the whole affair was a misunderstanding, one of those things where everyone involved has had a little too much to drink. And he and the member of the Ministerial Committee would appreciate it very much if I could solve the problem. After the meal I phoned the station. The SC confirmed that it was a bar brawl, and that it would be difficult to make a case against the suspects. I asked him to release them, and drop the charges. It was done.'"
quote: "'That's all, General?' Nyathi asked, with relief audible in his voice."
quote: "Afrika shook his head slowly. 'No, Zola, that is not all.' He consulted his notes again. 'On the twenty-ninth of September last year I drew money from an ATM in Long Street. I noticed that the balance in my cheque account was larger than I expected. I went into the bank and requested a statement. I saw that on the twenty-seventh there had been a deposit of twenty-five thousand rand. I enquired about the origin of the money, and the bank informed me it came from the Isando Friendship Trust. I said that must be a mistake, and told the bank I have to contact the Trust. But I could not track them down.'"
quote: "Afrika slowly folded up the paper. 'I phoned Kotko, because I suspected he might be behind the money. He said it was just to say thank you. For my help. So I said, I can't accept it, he must please arrange to reverse the payment, or he must give me the bank account number of the Trust so I could pay it back. He just laughed and said he didn't know if that could be done, he would have to find out. He never came back to me.'"
quote: "Silence descended. Outside, a pigeon fluttered at the window, and then perched on the windowsill."
quote: "'General, you had no idea that Kotko was the communist to whom the shooter was referring?'"
quote: "'I have to ask, when you brought the Sloet case to us, and the emails, why did you specifically ask for Benny and Mbali to work on the investigations?'"
quote: "'It's not because you recommended Benny to us in December? And you thought he owed you?'"
quote: "'Look, Zola, I understand that you have to ask these questions, but I'm telling you that it is not true.'"
quote: "'And you are the only one who knows what happened to Mbali in Amsterdam? You got her on the Dutch training programme when she was still working at Bellville, and the Dutch reported back to you.'"
quote: "Afrika threw his hands in the air. 'I know what it looks like. But I am telling you now, that is not how it is.' For the first time he looked at Griessel. 'Benny, you know me... Musad, you and I have come a long way together. You know I wouldn't do something like that. Tell them.'"
quote: "Manie folded his large hands. 'General, how does a white conservative Afrikaner know about your connection to Kotko?'"
quote: "Manie nodded thoughtfully. 'Has there been any contact between you and Kotko since the shooter began sending emails?'"
quote: "'Since September, I never had any contact with him again.' In a heavy tone."
quote: "'Does the person on the Ministerial Committee know about the shooter's emails?'"
quote: "Afrika looked at the pigeon on the windowsill, and shook his head. 'God, Musad, it will be a mess. He's got connections...'"
quote: "'Think for a moment about the mess we're in now, General. If we arrest him, it will be a sea of politics and drama. And another media circus, because the whole world will be able to see that photo of him and Baloyi. If we don't do it before four o'clock, the mad devil will shoot another of our people tonight.'"
quote: "When the general had gone, Manie sent for Mbali and told her the news."
quote: "'Whether we like it or not, we are working against time,' said Manie. 'Benny, you'll have to fly up to Gauteng, I'll get Mavis to see how soon we can get you on a flight, but I think you'd better pack a bag in the meantime. I will talk to the DPCI in Johannesburg, so they can track Kotko down and watch him. Vaughn can coordinate this side, we need more ammunition when you interrogate him, those phone calls in December are not enough.'"
quote: "'Mbali, everything points at the shooter knowing about John Afrika and Kotko's doings, that's our best chance to catch him. You and Vaughn must liaise closely, because the two cases are running together now. But begin at Table View station. Look at people who were there in September last year, who were dishonourably discharged, or under investigation.'"
quote: "The brigadier checked his watch. 'We have to get a press release out about Kotko by two, half past two, so it can get on the radio and Internet. There won't be a policeman shot today.'"
quote: "Cupido phoned, turned the phone around and put it upside down on his desk. The ring was clearly audible."
quote: "'Hello?' the lawyer answered irritably, probably because it was just after seven in the morning."
quote: "'We are eager to hear more about Silberstein's connection with a Mr Makar Kotko of ZIC...'"
quote: "'Mr Pruis, you will have to come and explain to us why you withheld information about Kotko and his relationship with Hanneke Sloet.'"
quote: "'I withheld nothing, Captain. How could I have known he was relevant?' But Pruis was on the defensive."
quote: "'With all your research, you must have known Kotko was involved in organised crime?'"
quote: "'You have forty minutes to present yourself at our offices,' said Griessel. 'Or I will bring a warrant, and the entire team of the Hawks' Organised Crime group.'"
quote: "Griessel and Cupido stood staring down at the upside-down cellphone. Pruis took some time to answer, 'What is your address?'"
quote: "'We are in the book. Ask for Captain Vaughn Cupido when you arrive.' Then he indicated to Cupido to end the call."
quote: "Cupido grinned, picked up the phone and turned it off."
quote: "'You give him hell, Vaughn. He knew, from the beginning, and he didn't say a word.'"
quote: "'I can't give him the Cupido treatment if Mbali is here, Benna.'"
quote: "Griessel understood. 'Then only get her in after you've got the fucker to talk.'"
quote: "At half past eight he drove to his flat to pack his bag. The traffic on the N1 to the city was dense and slow-moving."
quote: "He thought about John Afrika. He had felt sorry for him back in Manie's office. Afrika had only ever been good to him. Direct. Fair. Afrika had believed in him when the rest of the SAPS had written him off as a drunkard. Afrika and Mat Joubert. And Mat had left the Service."
quote: "The thing was, he didn't know if he could blame Afrika. What do you do if a member of parliament calls you up and says, 'Help out a little'? You are coloured, but still not black enough for affirmative action, you have a wife and children, a mortgage on your house. You are in your fifties, with maybe five, six years of service to go, you hope for one last promotion to give your pension a bit of a leg-up..."
quote: "Afrika had tried to return the money. And the Russians' drunk-and-disorderly charge was a mere trifle."
quote: "What would he have done if someone had paid twenty-five thousand into his account, and it was one helluva administrative headache to get it paid back? While Carla's student fees, and Fritz's school fees, and Anna's maintenance, and his new expensive clothes all had to be paid for? How long and how hard would he keep on trying to reverse the payment?"
quote: "The Hawks was another world. And he still stood half in and half out of it."
quote: "What else were they going to dredge up? Who was the person on the ministerial committee that Afrika was protecting?"
quote: "This was his first sample of big politics, his first taste of being caught in the crossfire."
quote: "Let him stick to his case. Henry van Eeden's words, 'Then I asked if everything was OK, and she said, yes, just an annoying Russian.'"
quote: "And Sloet's friend, Sam Grobler, 'All men have a thing for Hanneke.' And Griessel could understand that, if you looked at the photos, the smouldering sensuality."
quote: "Makar Kotko had met Sloet somewhere. And he had lusted for her, and he had phoned her. Over and over. But he was not what she wanted. She had said 'no'."
quote: "No. If you compared the middle-aged Russian with his little teeth and the slicked-back hair with Egan Roch. It couldn't be."
quote: "If she said 'no' to Kotko, was that a motive for murder?"
quote: "Maybe. If he was of economic value to her. Or to Silberstein Lamarque."
quote: "In Roeland Street his reverie was interrupted when Nyathi phoned."
quote: "'Benny, we're sending Bones with you to Jo'burg.'"
quote: "He understood immediately. It was better like that. In the circumstances, a black detective was much more politically correct."
quote: "His dress options were limited. He hadn't done laundry since last week, thanks to the investigation, and sleeping over at Alexa's. His entire life was in disarray. And for how many days should he pack?"
quote: "He packed all his clean clothes. Pulled on his new jacket, so that he wouldn't embarrass his Cape colleagues when he was in Gauteng."
quote: "They sat in the smallest DPCI office that Cupido could find, in battered chairs. Pruis sat with his back to the door, Cupido only half a metre away, his face as close as possible to the lawyer."
quote: "'My problem?' Pruis asked indignantly, but the arrogance of yesterday was gone. The man was tense."
quote: "'Yes. Your problem. Captain Griessel asked you about the communists. Yesterday I asked again, you and your lawyer buddies, but you knew nothing. Must have thought we're a bunch of fuckin' nitwit cops, who would never find out about Kotko.'"
quote: "'You are pretty pathetic. Where did they meet, Kotko and Sloet?'"
quote: "'Hanneke and I attended an Ingcebo meeting in Johannesburg. There was a cocktail party afterwards, in the Radisson Blu in Sandton.'"
quote: "'People from all the parties involved. Ingcebo, Gariep, SA Merchant Bank, the other legal firms...'"
quote: "'Then Kotko saw Hanneke. He came and talked to her, and—'"
quote: "Pruis shrugged. 'Why do you think? Hanneke was an attractive woman.'"
quote: "'When he heard what she did, he said he wanted to buy a share in Gariep on behalf of a client, and whether we would be interested in handling the contract.'"
quote: "'The allegations against Mr Arseny Egorov are just that. Allegations.'"
quote: "'Did Hanneke Sloet tell you Kotko phoned her that Saturday?'"
quote: "'He told her he was coming to Cape Town, he wanted to take her out to dinner.'"
quote: "'She said her schedule was full. She was packing. For the move. And for Christmas with her parents.'"
quote: "'Yes. She suspected Kotko's interest was... not necessarily business driven.'"
quote: "'Then we invited him to our offices. On Wednesday the twenty-second of December.'"
quote: "'Despite the fact that you already knew about the organised crime connections?'"
quote: "'He gave us a brief to represent ZIC in obtaining a share in Gariep Minerals. We accepted the brief and discussed the cost structure.'"
quote: "'And how much was in it for you?' Pruis looked away. 'How much?'"
quote: "'Sweet Jesus. Did you know he phoned her three times that afternoon and evening?'"
quote: "'And yet you never thought of telling us? Because you're still working on the Kotko contract, and that's fifteen million in your pockets, and you would rather let a murderer walk free than lose one fucking cent. You disgust me, you know that? Was Kotko in the Cape the day of Sloet's death? The eighteenth of January?'"
quote: "Cupido closed the door of the small office behind him and phoned Griessel."
quote: "'On the N1. I'll be there in ten minutes.'"
quote: "'Kotko was in the Cape on the eighteenth, the day she died. He had a meeting with Silbersteins and Sloet, just before lunch. Cause they had to discuss his contract. But he had the hots for her, big time.'"
quote: "'What about the weapon that he put down on the floor? What did he want to take from her? Yesterday you asked, what did she have?'"
quote: "'Maybe he just wanted to check if she was dead...'"
quote: "'We're going to need more than that in the circumstances.'"
quote: "'True. OK. Leave it to Beaver. Pop in when you get here.'"
quote: "Cupido put the phone away and opened the door again. Pruis was standing with his cellphone, busy typing an SMS."
quote: "'If I catch you letting slip one fucking word about this investigation, I'll fucking lock you up.'"
quote: "'Do you want to read it?' He held the phone up so Cupido could see."
quote: "'Because a lot of things fit. What did she have on him?'"
quote: "'You said you found out he was organised crime. Did you, like, use it as leverage? A bigger slice of the pie?'"
quote: "'I'm telling you, I'm going to get a court order for that due diligence, and if I find something there that you haven't shared, I swear, we'll prosecute you for obstruction, I'll fucking destroy you.'"
quote: "Pruis sat down, but the eyes flicked between table and wall. He said nothing."
quote: "Cupido took out his phone. 'OK. If that's the way you want to play it.'"
quote: "'We were... wary. So we asked Hanneke to investigate further.'"
quote: "'She hired a private company to look into Kotko, in January... Jack Fischer and Associates.'"
quote: "'Yes. He was head of the KGB's Africa bureau. In the eighties. Before the Wall came down.'"
quote: "'That's how he got to know so many of our government people. And then he became Arseny Egorov's security. In the nineties.'"
quote: "In Brigadier Manie's office Cupido brought them up to date with the latest information."
quote: "For the first time since the investigation had begun, Griessel felt the old stirring, his instinct kicking in. This was the one."
quote: "'The lawyer said Sloet knew about the KGB background,' said Cupido. 'He said Sloet did the investigation, she got the report from Jack Fischer and Associates. But he couldn't see why Sloet would want to blackmail Kotko with this. She was the kingpin of the whole contract, Kotko gave his business to Silbersteins because he fancied her so much.'"
quote: "'In any case that is all circumstantial evidence,' said Manie. 'There is nothing that can be used in court.'"
quote: "'Jack Fischer and Associates must have got the information about the bayonet from a source, Brigadier,' said Griessel. 'We will have to find out who that was.'"
quote: "'Jack Fischer is not a friend of the SAPS any more,' said Manie dubiously."
quote: "'There are other ways too,' said Griessel. 'If Kotko likes blades, somewhere in Johannesburg there will be someone who knows. He will have a pattern.'"
quote: "'You will have to put him through the grinder, Benny,' said Nyathi."
quote: "Manie was still sceptical. 'He was KGB. He won't be scared of questioning. And he has connections. We will have to place him at the murder scene. Forensically.'"
quote: "They all knew they had nothing at the moment that would do that."
quote: "'Do we have enough for a search warrant?' Nyathi asked. 'For his house and his office?'"
quote: "'Not yet,' said Manie. 'Let's see what happens in the next few hours. Which brings us to the shooter. Werner, how many people do you have available?'"
quote: "'Half of the team is at Table View, Brigadier,' said du Preez."
quote: "'I have a feeling...' said Manie. 'There are a bunch of old detectives at Jack Fischer and Associates. Perhaps with a grudge against the SAPS. They investigated Kotko, they could have come across proof of the payment to John Afrika. Get a personnel list for Fischer's and give it to IMC, let them cross reference to triple-two rifle owners, Kia vans. Anything.'"
quote: "'I want IMC to look at Fischer's Internet records. It would have logged if someone used an anonimail account. And I will go talk to Jack Fischer, after I've questioned Pruis,' said Mbali, the light of battle in her eyes."
quote: "'I think we should send Oom Skip Scheepers,' said Manie. 'Why, sir?' she asked indignantly."
quote: "'Because Jack Fischer is ex-SAPS. And he was Jack Fischer's commanding officer, years ago. We will have to use honey, Mbali. We're working against the clock, we don't have time for vinegar.'"
quote: "'Brigadier, I want to book Pruis. For obstruction,' said Cupido."
quote: "'Give him more rope,' said Manie. 'It's better to use it as leverage. For now.'"
quote: "'We have to go, Brigadier,' said Griessel. 'Our flight is at ten o'clock.'"
quote: "Mbali and du Preez asked Hannes Pruis to accompany them to the CATS interrogation room. It was cold as they walked down the corridors, but Pruis took his jacket off. There were sweat stains under his arms and down his back."
quote: "They sat down. Pruis asked for water. Mbali fetched a carafe and a glass. Pruis drank deeply, wiped the sweat from his brow and said he realised it looked as if he had been protecting Kotko. But he wanted to make it clear that before this morning, and Captain Griessel's phone call, he hadn't made the connection between Kotko and communism. It was twenty years since the end of communism in Russia. Twenty years. If they had asked him about a Russian it would have been a different matter... And he had never, but never, connected Kotko to Hanneke Sloet's murder. There was just no way, no motive, that made sense to him..."
quote: "'But you knew about the bayonet?' Mbali asked in total disbelief."
quote: "'But Hanneke was never tortured... I swear, it never crossed my mind.'"
quote: "Du Preez pointed at the video camera beside the table. 'We are going to record the interview, Mr Pruis.'"
quote: "Du Preez switched on the camera, and nodded at Mbali."
quote: "She asked, 'Did you know about Makar Kotko's ties to senior members of the South African Police Services?'"
quote: "'Yes. We knew he was connected to people in government. And the Youth League.'"
quote: "'You had Sloet contract Jack Fischer and Associates to investigate Kotko?'"
quote: "'And there is nothing in the report about a SAPS member?'"
quote: "'Did you do any other research, or have any other research done on Kotko?'"
quote: "Pruis shook his head. 'I've never heard of it.'"
quote: "'Just me. It's not the sort of thing Hanneke or I wanted to advertise.'"
quote: "'On the eighteenth of January you and Sloet had a meeting with Kotko at your offices?'"
quote: "'Did you indicate to Kotko in any way that you knew about his KGB background?'"
quote: "'Was there any way Kotko could have known about the Fischer investigation?'"
quote: "'Mr Pruis,' said du Preez, 'if another member of the SAPS is shot today, and we find any evidence that you have not told us the whole truth, I will make it my personal number-one priority to criminally prosecute you. In any way I can think of. Do you understand?'"
quote: "'Is there anything else you would like to say to us?'"
quote: "'I'm sorry. But I'm telling you, there is nothing else.'"
quote: "Mbali stood up. 'We'd better share all of this with Benny,' she said."
quote: "After take-off, Bones looked at Griessel's hands, clamped tightly to the armrests. 'You OK, Benny?'"
quote: "Later, as they enjoyed the light meal with the gusto of detectives who'd had no time for breakfast, he said, 'You know I'm just window dressing on this trip? The black face to appease the gods...'"
quote: "Griessel's mouth was full of food. He could only shrug."
quote: "'So, what do you say about all this stuff, Benny? The politics, the intimations of corruption...'"
quote: "He finished chewing before answering, 'What can you say, Bones? That's how it is. And it's not new. When I was with Murder and Robbery, in the old days... The things we had to do. For politics. Cover-ups. Look the other way. Those days you never saw any of it in the papers. They got away with a lot more.'"
quote: "'According to Kotko's credit card, on the night of the eighteenth of January he paid for two rooms at the Southern Sun Cullinan Hotel in the Strand area,' said Captain Philip van Wyk."
quote: "'That's right, Brigadier. We're waiting to hear from the hotel who signed in. But there were two more payments on the card. One was for dinner, an amount of 1,232.45 rand at the Buena Vista Social Café in the Waterfront. The other one was for 3,000 rand to Midnite Moves.'"
quote: "'Yes,' said van Wyk. 'His cellphone records show that he phoned Midnite Moves at 18.32 and 18.51. I thought you would want to know that.'"
quote: "'Sounds like a man setting up an alibi,' said Cupido."
quote: "'Exactly,' said Brigadier Manie. 'You'll have to go and find out, Vaughn.'"
quote: "Like Alexa and her 'people's dramatic images and conduits'. Trouble was, if he wasn't scurrying around with case files, he was thinking of his bank balance and his drinking problem and his divorce, about Carla's boyfriend and Fritz's tattoo. And how not to make a fool of himself. If he dreamed, it was about sex. With Alexa."
quote: "How did you get your head past all that and start worrying about the planet?"
quote: "Mbali was on the point of walking out of the women's toilet on the second floor of the DPCI building when two Hawks detectives walked past."
quote: "'Now you know why Afrika got her to be JOC on the shooter,' she heard one say."
quote: "In her office her phone rang. She answered. It was a member of the Hawks' Crime Against the State group (CATS) saying there were no suspects who had worked in Table View station in September and had since been discharged. And the station commander assured them that he had not discussed General Afrika's phone call, about releasing the two Russian citizens, with a single soul."
quote: "She did what she always did when she was upset. She got up from behind her painfully neat desk, picked up her big black handbag and slung it over her shoulder. She closed the office door behind her, walked to the lift, and took it down to the ground floor. She walked out of the front door, up Market Street, to Voortrekker. At the traffic lights she waited until she could cross, and then turned left, past the entrance to Home Affairs, where passport photo salesmen and hawkers of pens and ID-book covers hustled. Past the Tote. Today she didn't look with repugnance at the good-for-nothings hanging about there. Past K's Hair Design and into Catch of the Day."
quote: "The little grey-haired woman greeted her. 'The usual?' she asked Mbali."
quote: "She watched the woman scoop up the chips with a little steel shovel and slide them into the white paper bag until it was full, the salt and vinegar sprinkled over, the whole package wrapped up in a sheet of brown paper. She put it down beside the cash register."
quote: "Mbali had the cash ready. She handed it over, took the chips and can of cold drink and put them carefully in her handbag. So her colleagues would not see them."
quote: "'Bye.' She walked out. Only then, with her source of comfort safely in her handbag, did she think about the worry and the tension."
quote: "It was a triple blow. She wasn't making any progress. The allocation of the case hadn't been on merit. And Afrika had believed he could control her with his knowledge of the Amsterdam fiasco – the biggest, most horrible humiliation of her life. Which had only happened because she hadn't wanted to let her country down."
quote: "Her discomfort and the suspicions of Sunday were now confirmed."
quote: "Back in her office she shut the door, sat down, took out the Coke and chips and put them on the desk."
quote: "She pulled the first chip out with her fingers, and put it in her mouth."
quote: "She ate all the chips, solemnly, one by one. Before they got cold. She crumpled up the bag and the wrapping and went and disposed of them in the rubbish bin in the women's toilet. Otherwise they left a smell in her office and they gossiped about that too."
quote: "She walked back, sat down at her laptop and opened a new Word file on the computer. She began to type."
quote: "She saved the document. Unlocked the drawer, and took out a chocolate bar."
quote: "At a quarter past twelve Captain Moses Zondi of the Hawks in Johannesburg was waiting for them in the arrivals hall. He was a big man with a short scar from a knife wound on his neck. He and Boshigo greeted each other like old friends."
quote: "As they walked to the car, Moses Zondi said, 'Kotko is at his office in Sandton. We have full surveillance, and the Task Team, standing by. If he moves, we will know. We have another team outside his house in Magaliesview, near Montecasino in Fourways. The moment we have the search warrant, we'll go in. Task team, Forensics, the works.'"
quote: "'You have the right address this time, bro'?' Bones Boshigo asked. Nearly a year ago the Hawks in Gauteng had raided the wrong address when they had wanted to arrest the fugitive Radovan Krejcir for fraud. Since then they'd had to endure much mockery from their colleagues."
quote: "'Not funny,' said Zondi. Then he hit back, 'There's this rumour about the Slaapstad Hawks doing something really stupid in Amsterdam. What happened?'"
quote: "'Which reminds me, you have to call your CO, right away.'"
quote: "Griessel drew deeply on his cigarette, held it between his lips and took out his cellphone. He phoned Manie."
quote: "'First the good news, Benny,' the brigadier said. 'Skip Scheepers got the name of Jack Fischer's source from them half an hour ago, the one who knew about Kotko and bayonets in his KGB days. The source is a member of the Executive Committee of COPE, the opposition party. In the nineties he was still with the ANC's Intelligence wing, he got to know Kotko in Lusaka. Colonel Nyathi talked to the source, and he is prepared to go on record. I think the source is playing politics, but now it's in our favour."
quote: "'First prize would be an announcement that we have arrested Kotko,' said Manie. 'But you will have to be absolutely certain that it's a watertight case. All hell is going to break loose, Benny. This guy has connections. We're talking about people in government, Ministerial Committee, the Youth League. We're talking about immense pressure, we're talking about weeks of media hysteria. All our jobs are on the line. Mine, yours, the commanding officer up there. Do you understand that?'"
quote: "'Yes, Brigadier.' They had reached Moses Zondi's Hawks vehicle, a silver BMW 3-series sedan."
quote: "'Second prize is we leak that he is being detained for questioning. I don't know whether that would be enough to placate the shooter, but we will have to try. The same drama, the same political implications, so we will have to decide what the odds are.'"
quote: "'Yes, Brigadier.' Zondi took Griessel's case, put it in the boot of the BMW, motioned him to get in. Griessel got in the back."
quote: "'Buckle up,' said Moses Zondi, and stuck a blue light on the front windscreen. Griessel pinched the cellphone against his ear and clipped on the seat belt."
quote: "'The minute the search warrant is issued,' said Manie, 'we'll send our teams to search his office and house. The team leaders will talk to Bones, so that you are not interrupted.'"
quote: "'Bones will inform you if they find anything that might influence your decision.'"
quote: "'Phone me by ten to three, Benny. At the latest. And then tell me what we're going to do.'"
quote: "They drove out of the O.R. Tambo airport building into the Gauteng summer sunshine, blindingly bright. Zondi put on a pair of dark glasses and turned on the siren."
quote: "The traffic opened up to the wailing siren. Griessel had to talk loudly above the racket. He told Boshigo what Brigadier Manie had told him."
quote: "'When you worked with Vusi?' asked Zondi, and winked at Benny in the mirror."
quote: "Cupido got three patrol vehicles from Caledon Square station to help. Because he didn't have a search warrant, he would have to rely on effect. And attitude."
quote: "It took a moment before a buzzer sounded and the lock sprang open."
quote: "Muted lighting, cheap red carpet and cream-coloured couches, a pine wood bar against the furthermost wall. Behind it stood a skinny, sallow man with a cigarette between his fingers, and a thin black moustache that he smoothed nervously with an index finger. His eyes flickered uneasily from Cupido to the uniforms outside."
quote: "'Affonso?' he said with a peculiar doubtfulness, his narrow shoulders bowed."
quote: "Cupido looked sharply at the man. He suspected it was nerves that were causing the question marks. 'Captain Vaughn Cupido. Do you know the Directorate of Priority Crimes Investigations, Affonso Britos?'"
quote: "'Great stuff, Affonso. What do you know about the Hawks?'"
quote: "'That's the right answer. We are mean motherfuckers, Affonso. We can shut down your little whorehouse in five minutes flat, do you understand?'"
quote: "'It's a private club?' said Britos with cautious objection."
quote: "'Now you're losing me. We don't want verbal gymnastics.'"
quote: "'I can ask you for your liquor licence, Affonso. I can let those men out there come and check for fire safety violations. I can hit you with the whole Sexual Offences Act 23, if I had the inclination...'"
quote: "'But we're not going to waste our time on trivialities, OK?'"
quote: "'Genuine. Serious stuff, so we're not going to fuck each other around. OK?'"
quote: "'So let's talk about the eighteenth of January. And Makar Kotko.'"
quote: "'Bad answer. And let me tell you, he's yesterday's news. Today we will lock him up.'"
quote: "He felt the pressure, tried to escape it by looking out of the window. He had last been here four years ago. Everything looked different – the airport, the freeways, the suburbs and the business districts. There was building work everywhere."
quote: "But this was Johannesburg. It always looked different. They never stopped building and moving. That was what he liked about this place. There was an energy here, you felt it, you saw it, you heard it. Everyone in a hurry, determined, still prospecting for gold."
quote: "Long green grass beside the roads, here and there red earth. So different from the Cape."
quote: "How do you interrogate a former officer of the KGB? Cunning, experienced, he would have seen everything, would know every technique in the book."
quote: "They were going to arrive there and Kotko would be sitting behind his desk, most likely with his face to the door, and with a bright window behind him. All the advantages on his side."
quote: "There was something about the tailored jacket in Kotko's photograph, and the hair that was so perfectly combed. The fact that he thought he had a chance with Hanneke Sloet. The buddy of government figures, a fat wallet. If Kotko were merely an envoy of the Russian Mafia-boss billionaire, his effectiveness ended with his unmasking. He would want to prevent that at all costs."
quote: "That was what he must use. Hit Kotko where it hurt most. Take everything away – his job security, his belief he was untouchable, his political safety net, his dignity, his machismo."
quote: "Fuck. If it didn't work, next week he would be doing a shop security patrol around Canal Walk with a radio on his hip."
quote: "He took a deep breath, took out his phone and called Brigadier Musad Manie."
quote: "He told his commanding officer what he planned to do."
quote: "Manie was silent for a very long time. 'God, Benny. We are going to take punishment if he's not guilty,' he said. 'OK, you'll have to work fast. I'll phone the commanding officer up there straight away.'"
quote: "'Thank you, Brigadier.' He ended the call and shouted to Zondi, 'What's the nearest police station to Kotko's office?'"
quote: "She said she had to consider the bank as a potential place where someone might have established a connection between him and Kotko."
quote: "I don't have a connection with Kotko, Afrika said matter-of-factly."
quote: "No. He banked at ABSA, and the Isando Friendship Trust account was with FNB. That was where his main problems began."
quote: "She thanked him and walked down to the Hawks' corporate crime group who were based in the southern corner of the ground floor."
quote: "The whole team was gathered in one office, busy analysing the financial statements of Kotko's ZIC consultancy group – which Oom Skip Scheepers had obtained from Jack Fischer and Associates – for money laundering."
quote: "She said she was sorry to interrupt them, but she had to ask if anyone could explain to her how you could look into payments from a trust."
quote: "There were a few alternatives, they said. The bank where the trust account was, the auditors who were responsible for the trust's statements, and the Receiver of Revenue, who had to check the statements."
quote: "She thanked them and walked back to her office. She would begin at FNB. And banks, she knew, were the slowest of all enterprises to respond."
quote: "Their names were Nika and Natalya. A matching pair, two platinum blondes. Accents heavy, clothing light, flaunting their bodies. They sat side-by-side on the cream-coloured couch in Midnite Moves, their long, bare legs ending in high, spiked heels. Cigarettes between the fingers."
quote: "'You are Russian?' asked Cupido in surprise, and motioned to the fascinated uniforms to move back from the doorway. He wasn't completely sure which one was Nika and which Natalya."
quote: "'Ukrainian,' said the one on the left. Perhaps Nika. 'But we speak Russian.'"
quote: "'Because he wants to speak Russian while he makes hanky panky?'"
quote: "Cupido consulted his notes. 'That night he called here twice, just before six.'"
quote: "'Was it the Buena Vista Social Café? In the Waterfront?'"
quote: "They looked at each other, shrugged in unison, as though they didn't really care."
quote: "They did the shrug thing again, in unison. Cupido wondered whether it was a Ukrainian custom."
quote: "'And how much did Makar pay you to give him an alibi?'"
quote: "Nine minutes past one. They were on the sixth floor of the luxury office building on West Street in Sandton, outside the door of ZIC."
quote: "Griessel looked at the eight members of the task team, all kitted out in bullet-proof vests, helmets, boots, assault rifles. He knew they were cowboys, just like their Cape counterparts, fit and muscular, the over-zealous gleam to carry out his wishes in their eyes."
quote: "Griessel nodded at the task team leader, who in his turn gave a hand signal to his man right in front, the one with the big, cylindrical sledgehammer. He swung the hammer back and slammed it violently into the closed office door of expensive Scandinavian wood."
quote: "The task team stormed through, with all the shouting and uproar that Griessel had asked for."
quote: "He walked in behind them, his service pistol in his hand."
quote: "He saw the secretary, a middle-aged woman who looked like someone's mother, caught halfway out of her chair behind the desk, her hands covering her mouth, eyes wide and frightened."
quote: "The hammer was swung back and the only other office door was broken open too."
quote: "Kotko sat far back in his chair, his mouth half agape, his hands pressed instinctively flat on the desk top in front of him."
quote: "He looked a little older than he had on the photo, in an expensive dark suit, a snow-white shirt and deep blue tie. The oiled hair was combed back."
quote: "The task team reached him, jerked him out of the chair, just as Griessel had asked. Pressed him down on the carpet, clamped the handcuffs around his wrists, then the jingling shackles around his ankles."
quote: "Griessel walked up to Kotko, bent down, pressed the barrel of the Z88 against the Russian's cheek. 'You are in very deep trouble, arsehole.'"
quote: "'Fuck you,' said Griessel. He rifled through the Russian's jacket pockets, found his cellphone and took it out."
quote: "'Take him,' he said to the task team leader. 'Quickly.'"
quote: "Bones Boshigo walked in, wide-eyed at the action. 'The Giraffe phoned, Benny. We got the warrant.'"
quote: "The pretty young coloured woman at the Southern Sun Cullinan Hotel in the Strand area told Cupido the second room paid for on the night of the eighteenth of January had been for two of his 'friends'. Fedor Vazov and Lev Grigoryev."
quote: "He recognised the names. The same pair that Afrika had got off the bar brawl charge."
quote: "'Thank you, sister,' he said, with regret that he did not have more time to devote some attention to her."
quote: "He asked for the head of security at the hotel. When the man arrived, an ex-policeman with a round beer belly, Cupido said, 'I see you have CCTV cameras everywhere. How long do you keep the videos?'"
quote: "The manager of Sandton's FNB branch phoned Mbali within twenty minutes after she had requested the information."
quote: "'Head office says it can save some police lives,' said the woman. 'All I can tell you is the Isando Friendship Trust is mostly an Internet account. There is no designated bank officer to take care of it. We have systems in place to alert us when the account gets overdrawn, or about POCA violations.'"
quote: "'Do you have any white, Afrikaans, middle-aged men with access to the account details?'"
quote: "'Is it possible to see if they have looked at the account since last September?'"
quote: "Griessel sat in the back of the BMW, along with two burly task team members. They followed the speeding police van, both vehicles had their sirens on."
quote: "'So how are the wedding plans coming along?' Zondi shouted at Boshigo."
quote: "'You getting married soon, Bones?' asked Griessel, who hadn't known about it."
quote: "'Is that what your wedding is going to cost?' Griessel asked anxiously."
quote: "'You have to pay a hundred thousand so you can marry her?'"
quote: "'That's what the reception will cost you. We guys all pay, one way or another.'"
quote: "The Sandton police station was an ugly two-storey building of khaki brick, with steel shutters over the windows and a red zinc roof."
quote: "They had to wait at the portcullis, then drove to the back of the inner courtyard. The uniforms jumped out, unlocked the back of the police van. They followed Griessel's instructions, hauled Kotko out and marched him to the cell block at the rear."
quote: "He looked at Benny, hate written across his face as he made hurried little shuffling steps in the foot shackles. 'You are finished,' he said, his accent pronounced. 'Tomorrow you will have no job.'"
quote: "Griessel grinned at him and followed on behind. The cell block stank of urine, vomit and disinfectant."
quote: "They dragged Kotko to the nearest cell, on the right, and shoved him into the single, battered plastic and steel chair that was positioned with its back to the door. Griessel and the two task team members followed. He motioned the uniforms to close the door. They slammed it shut with a loud metallic clang."
quote: "Griessel sat down on the bare mattress on the concrete bed. The task team members stood on either side of Benny, their assault rifles aimed at Kotko."
quote: "'Fuck you,' said Kotko, and the grimace of fury bared his pointed teeth. With his hands cuffed behind him, he sat awkwardly bent forward, just as Griessel had hoped."
quote: "He took out Kotko's cellphone, held it in his hands. 'Who are you going to call now, Makar?' he asked with as much contempt as he could muster. 'You think you are this important person. You think if you pay people money, if you corrupt policemen and politicians, we can't touch you. But you're making a big mistake. Let me tell you what I'm going to do. I am going to have a press conference in exactly...' He looked at his watch. He saw it was nineteen minutes to two. '... forty-five minutes. And I'm going to tell the media I have arrested you. And then I'm going to tell them who you really are. This sick fuck who tortures people with a bayonet...'"
quote: "'This cheap Russian gangster who is too disgusting to be liked by women, so he has to pay prostitutes...'"
quote: "'Fuck you!' Kotko tried to leap off his chair at Griessel. The man's arms strained against the handcuffs and his face was blood red. The task team members pressed the barrels of their weapons against his chest, forcing him back roughly."
quote: "'You don't want people to know you are a loser. A pervert. I will tell the media you are a sad, middle-aged wacko who stalks women... who kept calling a woman because he hired her law firm. You know what she told her friends about you, Makar? That you are a pathetic Russian. That is what I will tell the media.'"
quote: "Kotko spat at him. The spit landed on the lapel of Griessel's new jacket. He ignored it."
quote: "'And I will tell them that's why you killed her. Because your ego is so small that you could not take the rejection. I know what happened, Makar. You called an escort agency for a whore that night. And then you got all worked up, and decided you wanted the real thing. So you went to Hanneke Sloet's flat and you took out your little penis, and she laughed at you, because you couldn't get it up. Too old. Too pathetic. So you stabbed her. That's what I will tell the media, and then we will see how many political friends you have left, you sick fucking pervert.'"
quote: "'I did not kill her!' screamed Kotko, out of control."
quote: "'Or was it something else, Makar? Did she blackmail you? For a bigger commission? Or cash? Did she say she'll talk to all your political friends about your bayonet days? Or to the media? Is that why you killed her?'"
quote: "'I did not kill her,' he repeated, this time slightly calmer."
quote: "Griessel stood up, picked up the end of Kotko's tie and wiped the spit off his jacket lapel. 'You can tell that to the judge, you bastard.' He walked to the door and banged on it."
quote: "The uniforms opened it from outside. Griessel motioned to the task team members to go out. He followed them, slamming the door behind him, walked down the passage, past the rest of the task team, and the uniforms, and Bones Boshigo, who was standing near the exit, and out into the sun."
quote: "He took out his cigarettes, lit one. Noticed a slight tremor in his fingers. Jesus, what he would give for a Jack Daniels, neat, right now."
quote: "'I think it went reasonably well.' He drew on the cigarette. 'Big ego. It helps.'"
quote: "Griessel consulted his watch. A quarter to two. 'We'll give him five minutes. To take a good look at that cell.'"
quote: "'Mbali phoned,' said Bones. 'She said Table View's bad apples are all accounted for, and the Fischer private eyes look clean too. She said you must ask this guy who would have known about the payment to John Afrika. And the Isando Friendship Trust.'"
quote: "'Our two white Afrikaans employees did not access the account of the Isando Friendship Trust in any way over the past nine months,' she said."
quote: "'Yes. As a matter of fact, none of our personnel accessed the files since September. The log shows only routine system maintenance.'"
quote: "She sighed long and deeply when she put the phone down. Then she positioned her small pudgy hands over the keyboard of the laptop to Google the phone number of the South African Revenue Services."
quote: "The security chief of the Cullinan Hotel played the videos back on a computer monitor for Cupido. At twice the normal speed, as they didn't have the time."
quote: "The first camera showed the front lobby of the hotel on the night of the eighteenth of January. It showed how Makar Kotko and two other men came out of the lifts, walked through the lobby, and out through the door. The timeline showed 19.02."
quote: "He asked for the video to be fast-forwarded to 21.00. On the time code 21.26, Kotko walked back in through the front door. With Natalya and Nika on either side of him. With an arm around each of them."
quote: "Fourteen minutes to two. Griessel went back to the cell alone. Knowing that he still had one hand to play. And there was nothing in it. He was going to bluff. Big time."
quote: "He opened the door and said, 'You're under arrest for the murder of Hanneke Sloet. You're under arrest for money laundering, and for corruption. We're going to put you away for a long time, Makar.' Then he slammed the door shut behind him."
quote: "'You have to understand, I did not kill her,' said Kotko, his face turned towards Griessel. He had calmed down. There was pleading there now, as though he was depending on Griessel's sense of fairness."
quote: "Benny sat down slowly, shook his head. 'I know you did it. We have your cellphone records. They place you at her apartment that night. They show how you stalked her in December. You wiped the door handle, Makar. But we have stuff that can get latent prints from any surface. We have forensic evidence. Hair. We will match it to your hair. And you have a history of sticking blades into people. We have a witness for that. That's all we need to convict you.'"
quote: "'But I have an alibi. There were two girls. From the escort agency. You can call them now.'"
quote: "'You paid two junkie prostitutes to say they were with you? That's your alibi?'"
quote: "Kotko's face changed colour again. 'They are not junkies. I did not fucking kill her.'"
quote: "'You can try your luck in court,' said Griessel, shrugging."
quote: "'I don't have time. The press conference is in twenty minutes.' He stood up. 'You will stay here for a few nights.'"
quote: "'You cannot do this. I have the right to call my lawyer,' said Kotko."
quote: "'No, you have the right to legal representation. Section thirty-five-one D of the Constitution. It says I can detain you for forty-eight hours before I take you to court. You can call your lawyer tomorrow. Maybe.'"
quote: "He walked towards the door. Kotko looked at him urgently. 'Please,' he said."
quote: "'See you tomorrow.' He opened the door, then stopped as though reconsidering."
quote: "'Please,' said Kotko again, a man who stood to lose everything."
quote: "'The police general who got your two friends out of jail in Cape Town. You paid him twenty-five thousand rand.'"
quote: "'The Isando Friendship Trust did. We know all about it.'"
quote: "Kotko swore in Russian. Then he asked, 'What do I get, if I tell you?'"
quote: "'I want to call a lawyer. And you must check my alibi first. Before talking to the media.'"
quote: "Kotko bowed his head. He considered the offer, then looked up. 'No media talk today.' With finality."
quote: "When the man from SARS said his name was Gideon Cebekhulu, Mbali switched over to Zulu in relief and asked him where he was from. From there on it was easy."
quote: "He consulted his system while she held on. She waited five minutes before he said the auditors who had submitted and verified the statements of Isando Friendship Trust were De Vos and Partners. He gave her a post box address in Edgemead."
quote: "He said there wasn't one. But there was a cellphone and fax number."
quote: "'F.R.I.K.K.I.E. is his name. D.E. V.O.S,' he spelled it out, slowly and carefully."
quote: "She wondered why people felt they had to use more than one exclamation mark."
quote: "She noted the same cellphone and fax number that she had obtained from the friendly man at SARS. This time she had a name. Frikkie de Vos."
quote: "Luck was just not on her side. She got up. Corporate Crime would have to tell her how she could track down an accountant."
quote: "'You must phone the Camel urgently,' said Bones outside, in the blinding Sandton sunlight."
quote: "Brigadier Manie's voice was urgent. 'Vaughn Cupido says it looks like Kotko didn't do it. The hotel video shows he was in his room with two escorts the whole night.'"
quote: "'I know. But it doesn't mean he's completely innocent. Remember the two henchmen that John Afrika got off the assault charges at Table View?'"
quote: "'Vaughn says it could have been them. Fedor Vazov and Lev Grigoryev. They were in the same hotel as Kotko, and went out in the early evening with him, but only came back after twelve. Table View still had their address details on hand. The two are up there, not far from where you are. The task team has gone to get them. You'll have to tackle them too, Benny.'"
quote: "'Right, Brigadier.' He hoped Manie wouldn't hear his faked enthusiasm."
quote: "'Brigadier, Kotko says there's only one man who knew about the payments from the Isando Trust. An accountant by the name of Frikkie de Vos. Trouble is de Vos blew his brains out with a shotgun on the fifteenth of January. Apparently he was a heavy gambler, and lost just about everything that Saturday night. Can we check the records to see if he's telling the truth?'"
quote: "'What are we going to do about the media, Brigadier?'"
quote: "'Benny, I wish I could tell you. I don't see any light yet. But we still have about forty minutes. Let's see where we stand then.'"
quote: "Griessel went and had a smoke in the corner of the police station yard, on his own. So that the bottled-up cursing could be released. 'F-f-f-f-u-u-u-ck,' he said, the fricative stretched out and filled with emotion. Then he said it again and again, staccato swearing bubbling out with all his frustration."
quote: "If Kotko had an alibi, if it wasn't him, why had the shooter sent the photo? Why was he messing with them? Why was he pushing them around?"
quote: "For the fun of it. To see the police run around in circles, like headless chickens – what sort of sick bastard would do that? All the trouble to fly up here, all the suspense, all the rules broken to interrogate the Russian, all the risks taken by Manie and Nyathi and the Gauteng Hawks, and all for nothing?"
quote: "And the craving for the bottle stirred in him. His defence mechanism for over a decade. When nothing made sense, drink. It didn't help to understand, but at least it made you feel less bad about all the shit."
quote: "He angrily flicked the cigarette butt through the high wire fence, and watched it land in a small explosion of sparks on the tarred road."
quote: "'It seems like this guy thought no one would look too closely, Brigadier. Very careless, probably because of all his political clout. We've got the goods on him, there's no doubt.'"
quote: "'Once we put the evidence on the table, his connections will evaporate like mist in the sunshine.'"
quote: "She walked into the IMC at the Hawks, found a weary Fanie Fick behind his computer and put a note down in front of him. 'You should get some sleep,' she said."
quote: "'I'm just happy to be part of a big case again,' he said, looking at her with his hangdog eyes, and smiling."
quote: "'I want to see if Hanneke Sloet dialled this number.'"
quote: "'One second,' said Fick, and typed the number into the database. Mbali felt sorry for him. She had followed the Steyn case in detail when she was still at the Bellville detective branch. She knew she could easily have made the same mistakes."
quote: "'Yes,' said Fick, somewhat surprised. 'On Wednesday the twelfth January.'"
quote: "'Six days before she was killed,' said Mbali. And she knew why IMC hadn't followed up on it. De Vos was an accountant. They thought it was merely a work-related call to a company that was connected to the empowerment transaction."
quote: "'An accountant,' she said. 'Frikkie de Vos. The problem is, he's dead.'"
quote: "Before he could ask why that was a problem, she had walked out."
quote: "At a quarter past two the task team brought in Fedor Vazov and Lev Grigoryev – two men in their forties. Griessel noted the tough leanness, the physical self-confidence, the lack of anxiety, the stoic patience. Old soldiers, he suspected."
quote: "They had identical tattoos in the angle between thumb and index finger. It looked like a C and a six."
quote: "He questioned them in a small office in the police station proper, because there were no more cells available. Displaying no emotion, with quiet, calm voices and broken English they answered his questions. They were the bodyguards of 'Mister' Kotko. Mister Kotko needed bodyguards because this was a very dangerous country. No, they didn't accompany Mister Kotko to his office every day because it was safe there. It was only when he went to other places."
quote: "Yes, they remembered the visit to Cape Town on the eighteenth of January. They stayed in the same hotel as Mister Kotko. They spent the day in the reception room of a legal firm, while Mister Kotko was in meetings. That evening they had dinner at a restaurant with Mister Kotko and his two lady friends. Then Mister Kotko and the friends went back to the hotel. And they went to the Jack of Diamonds, the strip joint. They couldn't remember what street it was in, but it was about two blocks from the hotel. About nine o'clock. They couldn't remember the exact time when they went back to the hotel."
quote: "'You let Mister Kotko go back to the hotel on his own.'"
quote: "They didn't know whether anyone would remember them at the Jack of Diamonds. Maybe the girl who had entertained them to a lap dance in a private room. Cathy. Or Cindy. Or something. Maybe the barman, because they had ordered quite a lot. And left a big tip."
quote: "No, they wouldn't object to having photos taken of them to show to the people at the Jack of Diamonds. They had nothing to hide."
quote: "At twenty to three Griessel knew he would get nothing more out of them."
quote: "Even worse was his suspicion that they were telling the truth."
quote: "For the first time Musad Manie sounded angry. 'Why, Benny? If it wasn't Kotko, and it wasn't his henchmen, why is the shooter bothered with them?'"
quote: "'Brigadier, I may be wrong. But even if it were these two, we have nothing to connect them to the case. And I strongly doubt that Hanneke Sloet would have opened the door to them.'"
quote: "'Hell, Benny, I can't understand this one. I just don't understand it. We're not a bunch of palookas. Someone is messing with our heads, and I don't know who it is any more. Vaughn says there are video cameras in the hotel lifts, at the stairs, in the lobby, and the exit. There's no way Kotko could have left his room without being recorded. And we don't have anything else.'"
quote: "Manie sighed. 'Here's what we're going to do, Benny. Cloete is here with me. We're going to tell the media that Kotko and his two pals were arrested today for money laundering. And that we are also investigating him for corruption, and organised crime activities, and possible involvement in the murder of Hanneke Sloet. Maybe the shooter will swallow that. Then I'll phone the National Commissioner, and we'll wait for the bombs to drop.'"
quote: "'So go and arrest the lot of them, and tell our Gauteng colleagues to keep them behind lock and key until we are sure. Then you and Bones come home. As soon as you can get on a flight. So we can look at this thing all over again.'"
quote: "The sniper checked the right-hand lower corner of his computer screen. He saw it was two minutes past four."
quote: "He thought he would feel relief. Happiness. They hadn't arrested him for the Sloet murder. They had missed the cut-off time, hadn't kept their part of the ultimatum."
quote: "That meant they were protecting Kotko. The whole corrupt gang. He was right. Captain Benny Griessel was working for John Afrika. They were all in it together."
quote: "At a quarter past four, after she had received the information about the suicide from the Bothasig station, Captain Mbali drove to the house of the late auditor Frikkie de Vos."
quote: "It was a large, neglected place in the quiet Trafford Close."
quote: "Silence at first, then footsteps. Someone peered through the spyhole. 'I don't want to buy anything.' A woman's voice."
quote: "'South Africa Police Services. I need to talk to you about Mr Frikkie de Vos.'"
quote: "'My Afrikaans is bad. I am police. I have to talk to you about Frederik de Vos.'"
quote: "'Frikkie is dead,' the woman said. 'You people should know that.'"
quote: "She wasn't a pretty woman. And she was crying."
quote: "'Mrs de Vos, where do I find your husband's associates?'"
quote: "'It's been ten years since he started using the firm's money for gambling. That's when the partners left.'"
quote: "'On the sign, yes. But it was only him. No right-thinking auditor would come within a mile of him. Why are you looking for them?'"
quote: "'I need to look at his client list. Do you know where the records are?'"
quote: "She wiped the tears away with the back of her hand and asked in surprise, 'But don't you know about the break-in?'"
quote: "'Someone got in. The week after his death. Walked off with the computer and the back-up. Must have read in the paper that Frikkie was dead, knew there was no one there.'"
quote: "'All the records were on the computer?' Her heart sank."
quote: "'Are you from the Bothasig station?' Mrs de Vos asked."
quote: "'They only have the file on the suicide. It doesn't say anything about Mr de Vos's work.'"
quote: "The woman shook her head. 'They asked all the questions after the break-in, and I told them.'"
quote: "'I kept my nose out of it, I don't know who his clients were.'"
quote: "'Because Frikkie wasn't a fool. His crooked clients paid him cash. And he paid his lame duck people cash. And he gambled with cash. And he never paid a cent of tax on the whole lot.'"
quote: "The Jack of Diamonds in Prestwich Street had a playing cards theme. There were neon examples outside, a massive framed one on the rough, varnished brick wall inside. Playing cards for beer mats and menus and the drinks list at the bar. Playing cards on the barman's shirt."
quote: "Cupido sat down on a bar stool. 'Hi, Jack,' he said."
quote: "'You think you're the first to try that one?' said the barman, not amused."
quote: "'You're a cop,' said the barman. He had a hand-rolled cigarette behind his ear. A laconic expression."
quote: "'A Hawk, pappie. Your worst nightmare.' He shoved his identity card across the counter."
quote: "'Are you a comedian, Jack? Who do you think is going to have the last laugh?'"
quote: "'I'm just putting all my cards on the table here.'"
quote: "The barman took the cigarette from behind his ear, lit it slowly, and studied the pictures. Eventually he said. 'Yep, they've been here. Last time was about a month ago.'"
quote: "'They took Sandy for a private lap dance in the Queen of Hearts...'"
quote: "'There.' He pointed to a curtained doorway, behind him. There were playing cards on the curtain."
quote: "'Don't you think the playing card theme is a little overdone?'"
quote: "'I'll redecorate your face if you don't lose the attitude. How come you remember about Sandy?'"
quote: "'And now you're going to tell me you don't do that kind of thing in this posh establishment.'"
quote: "'Sorry, I don't do it personally, but you can ask one of the girls.'"
quote: "'Cool it. They didn't want to pay. Blow job is extra.'"
quote: "'Twelve. One. Thereabouts. Drank a lot. Left a big tip.'"
quote: "Mbali knew the Bothasig Police Station was one of the best in the Peninsula. That's why she was puzzled as to why they had said nothing about the break-in at Frikkie de Vos's office when she enquired about the suicide case file."
quote: "He was a young Xhosa sergeant, full of respect for her Hawks status and rank, and he told her it wasn't a break-in."
quote: "'I did. Just to give her the number. I mean, she'd just lost her husband, who'd gambled away all their savings. But there was no burglary. That's why we didn't tell you about it.'"
quote: "'OK. Now, tell me from the beginning. When did she report the burglary?'"
quote: "'On the twenty-first of January. Six days after the suicide.'"
quote: "'No, she called the station. A vehicle with two uniforms went out to the office...'"
quote: "'At the back of the Panorama Shopping Centre in Sonnendal. Hendrik Verwoerd Drive.'"
quote: "'I was called out. So I saw right away there was no forced entry. Two locks on the door, these small, high windows, but there was nothing. And inside too. Everything was fine. No mess, everything in order. But missis de Vos said there was a computer there, and two back-up hard drives. But you know how, when you pick up a computer, you can see the clean square where it stood?'"
quote: "'Nothing like that. And then I asked for the purchase receipt for the computer, and she said her husband didn't keep receipts. He just worked in cash. So then I asked about the safe. Big as a fridge, standing right there. With a combination lock. And she said there was nothing taken from the safe. I mean, Captain, why would they not take the safe? If they wanted to steal stuff.'"
quote: "'How did she know there was nothing taken from the safe?'"
quote: "Griessel leaned back in the seat of the plane and shut his eyes for a moment. He was exhausted. His head felt thick, as if the extent of the case had grown too big. There wasn't enough room for everything any more."
quote: "At that moment it was such an immediate, seductive escape that he had raised his hand halfway before he came to his senses."
quote: "He needed to rest. He had to think. He wanted to close his flat door behind him and pick up his bass guitar and just sit there, his brain in neutral, his fingers strolling along the neck, the notes vibrating in his belly. He wanted to go to sleep in the knowledge that tomorrow would be a relaxing day. He wanted lie down beside Alexa Barnard on her bed, behind her back, slip his hand around to her soft breast."
quote: "He opened his eyes, not liking the direction his thoughts were taking him. He sighed, glanced at Bones beside him, staring into space."
quote: "Kotko kept on phoning Sloet and inviting her to dinner, but she constantly said no. Perhaps because Silbersteins quickly learned that Kotko might be organised crime. Or maybe just because she genuinely didn't have time between the move to Cape Town and a visit to her parents over Christmas. But most likely because she wasn't sexually interested in Kotko at all."
quote: "After the twenty-second of December, Kotko stopped phoning her."
quote: "Sloet moved into the new flat, and early in January she was ordered to investigate Kotko thoroughly. The report from Jack Fischer and Associates revealed his KGB history, and the fact that he liked to torture people with a bayonet. In spite of this, Silbersteins continued to do contract work for ZIC."
quote: "On the morning of the eighteenth of January Kotko and Sloet met at a Silbersteins conference. That night Kotko and his hangers-on were sleeping only four blocks away from Sloet's apartment. Kotko hired two sex workers and spent the night with them, and his henchmen were at a strip joint till after twelve. Well established alibis."
quote: "But nothing prevented him from hiring a fourth person to murder Sloet. It was unlikely, because she would hardly have opened the door for a stranger. But Kotko might have known enough about her by then to get someone she knew. The alternative was that she was on her way out at ten o'clock that night. The attacker could have waited by the door, and surprised her when she opened it. But she wasn't wearing underwear, and in general was not dressed to go out. So, also unlikely."
quote: "'What am I missing?' he asked after Bones had listened attentively to everything."
quote: "'And the rejection theory. I don't know, Benny. You establish alibis for yourself and your muscle, you hire a man who might get into her flat, maybe not... It's a lot of trouble, a lot of risks, just to massage your ego.'"
quote: "'We're missing something, Bones. That Silbersteins meeting on the eighteenth... I don't know.'"
quote: "The air hostess put a meal tray in front of each of them."
quote: "'What a sad life we lead,' said Bones Boshigo, 'when the only balanced meal we get is airline food.'"
quote: "Griessel didn't hear. His brain was busy with the tangled web of the case. 'Why?' he asked."
quote: "'Because this is all we've had to eat today.'"
quote: "'No, Bones. I mean, why would the shooter lie to us? About Kotko? His whole story is about the police protecting the communist. That's his entire justification.'"
quote: "Mbali drove to the Panorama Shopping Centre first, and clicked her tongue when she saw the Hendrik Verwoerd road sign. She parked, got out, went in search of the little office, as the Xhosa sergeant from Bothasig had directed her."
quote: "It was hidden away around at the back. It looked almost like a service entrance, just the usual sun-bleached brown wooden door, with a keyhole below the handle, and an additional outside bolt from which hung a big shiny new Yale padlock."
quote: "She walked around the corner to the main entrance of the shopping centre. She found a security official, showed him her identification card, and explained what she wanted. He was eager to help. He called a colleague over his radio, asked her to wait, and came back after a few minutes with the colleague. Both were carrying plastic milk crates."
quote: "She went with them back to the office. They stacked the crates under the window and carefully helped her to climb up. She had to stand on tiptoe to see through the window."
quote: "There was nothing inside, what she could see of the room was completely empty."
quote: "She climbed down, thanked the men, and walked back to her car. She climbed in, switched on the engine. Switched it off again. She took her cellphone out of her capacious black handbag, and typed a number in. It rang for a long time."
quote: "'No, I'm sorry, I was on my way home. The new shift is still in the parade room.'"
quote: "'Could you ask them to get the cellular records for the de Vos cellphone number? The one I told you about?'"
quote: "She knew he must be very tired, but he was so eager to help. 'I appreciate it,' she said."
quote: "There was a moment, just before he turned off the R27 onto the N1, that the red-painted Chana skipped and stuttered, and the sniper clamped his fists tighter around the steering wheel."
quote: "What if he broke down on the freeway, this time of the afternoon? So terribly exposed. Traffic police would stop..."
quote: "He glanced back quickly. Just the toolboxes. Even if they opened them, they first had to lift the top tray to see the rifle."
quote: "And he wasn't wearing the wig today. A new green Springbok cap. Dark glasses."
quote: "He just had to stay calm, not look guilty. But the Chana had to last. Just until tomorrow."
quote: "He listened attentively to the engine, the city ahead of him."
quote: "He kept left, in the slow lane, for the Oswald Pirow off-ramp, on the way to Griessel's flat."
quote: "Manie sat waiting for the call to say yet another policeman had been shot. He tried to steel himself for it, but he knew it would still be the final blow."
quote: "It was the National Commissioner. He was furious. He said he hadn't believed the mess with the shooter and the Sloet case could get any worse. But it had. He said the media had gone crazy. They were calling him, the Minister of Police, and the President of the ANC Youth League. Hundreds of calls, he said. Far-fetched allegations. About Kotko, about the Youth League, about the very strong possibility that the shooter was entirely correct, the government and the SAPS were protecting a murderer."
quote: "Manie, worn out by the pressure and suspense of the long day and little sleep, allowed the commissioner to scold and shout and blame. There was nothing else he could do. He knew he had made this bed for himself. It had been the right thing to do. And now he had to sleep on it. Unfortunately it was figurative sleep only."
quote: "For twenty-seven long minutes he listened to the tirade."
quote: "Then he put the receiver down softly on the cradle."
quote: "Here it comes now, he thought. The shooter's next victim."
quote: "He wiped his hand across his brow, and picked up."
quote: "It was the National Director of the Hawks, in Pretoria."
quote: "For the second time Mbali sat in the fussily over-decorated sitting room, with the widow of Frederik de Vos. 'There was cash in that safe,' she said to the woman."
quote: "The widow cast her eyes down to the brandy glass on the table beside the easy chair. She picked it up and took a sip. The ice tinkled in the room's silence. She put the glass down again carefully."
quote: "Mbali suspected the action was a kind of admission. 'The day after your husband died, you went to his office. To get the money. Because you knew it was all there was. You saw that the computer was gone, and you suspected that someone else had a key. So you went and bought a new lock for the office door. Is that right?'"
quote: "'Mrs de Vos, you have not committed any crime, as far as I know. You can tell me.'"
quote: "'I give you my word. You are not in trouble.'"
quote: "Mrs de Vos breathed slowly in. She said, 'It was only on the Monday. On Sunday I was too crushed.'"
quote: "'It was his lucky number. Double four, double seven, double four. That's all he ever used. But I never had a key to the door lock. But the hospital gave me this plastic bag...' Her face crumpled, her eyes grew moist. 'This little bag of his things. His cigarettes, his Zippo...' She sobbed, picked up the glass again."
quote: "'And you went in on the Monday. To get the cash.'"
quote: "'And you saw the computer and the drives were missing.'"
quote: "She took a tissue from the sleeve of the blue jersey, blew her nose. 'The computer things were still there, on the Monday. In the other office. The one his people always used. When I went back on the Friday, they were gone.'"
quote: "'Where is the furniture now? The furniture from the office?'"
quote: "Mbali sighed. That probably meant the furniture was forensically contaminated. But she would have to make sure. 'What else was in the safe?'"
quote: "She waited for Mrs de Vos to calm down. Then she asked, 'How much was left?'"
quote: "'Four thousand two hundred. That's all. That's my inheritance. That's what Frikkie left me.'"
quote: "'I have to know who had a key to that office.'"
quote: "'Frikkie was never at the office. That was the only way they could get in. He gave them the key.'"
quote: "The widow shook her head and picked up the glass."
quote: "'I need a photograph of your husband,' said Mbali. 'And the details of the auctioneer. And the keys to the office.'"
quote: "The sniper parked in the spot he had identified the evening before – just around the corner of Vriende Street, in Schoonder, with the nose of the Chana pointing at the Gardens Centre."
quote: "From here he would have an unimpeded view of the automatic steel gate of Nelson's Mansions, the old 1950s block of flats. And he would be safe – the streets in the area were densely parked with cars, flat and town house dwellers who probably didn't have garages. Another vehicle would not attract attention."
quote: "The night before he had sat here in the Audi for over an hour. He saw how every occupant of Nelson's Mansions stopped at the gate, fiddled with a remote. He had used his watch to see that it took an average of twenty-two seconds for the gate to open completely. He would have nearly thirty seconds, from the moment that the detective stopped and pressed the button until he drove in."
quote: "Thirty seconds, to shoot the tyres of both wheels on this side. And then, the driver."
quote: "That was what he had practised, in the veld beside the R304 and the Little Salt River this afternoon. Three shots. Maybe four. Front, back, driver."
quote: "Yesterday he saw there was a street light, about halfway between this parking place and the driveway of the flats. Over the distance of about forty metres he could see, clearly enough, the face of everyone who stopped... Without a scope. He had studied Griessel's photos carefully on the Internet and in the newspapers. The over-long, unkempt hair, the peculiar Slavic eyes, the careworn face."
quote: "He made sure the Chana's doors were locked. He waited, since there were quite a few pedestrians, on their way home."
quote: "When it was quiet, he climbed quickly over to the back, and pulled the screen down."
quote: "He took off the cap and dark glasses, put the strap of the torch around his head, and switched it on, at the lowest setting. Opened the tool chest, lifted out the tray, and put it aside."
quote: "At twenty past seven Mbali finally traced the cellphone number of the auctioneer."
quote: "She identified herself and said, 'I need access to the furniture of Frikkie de Vos.'"
quote: "'No. I need access now. It is related to this mad dog who shoots the police. A matter of life and death.'"
quote: "'Please tell me, how do you load and transport furniture for auction?'"
quote: "'Good. I will meet you at your warehouse in half an hour.'"
quote: "'I live in Somerset West. It's going to take me an hour.'"
quote: "Then she phoned the head of the PCSI, the elite Provincial Crime Scene Investigation unit."
quote: "Griessel phoned Alexa while they were driving back from the airport."
quote: "He phoned Ella. Her phone went to voice mail. He tried to remember what Alexa had said this morning before he left for Johannesburg. The big rehearsal tonight. Or was it tomorrow night? He had only been half listening."
quote: "He hoped there wasn't any more trouble. Please not tonight."
quote: "Beyond Tygerberg Hospital his phone rang. He answered in a hurry, hoping it was Alexa."
quote: "Griessel said they were ten minutes away from the DPCI offices."
quote: "'We're having a meeting when you're back.' In a funereal voice."
quote: "The sniper was uncomfortable and frustrated. So many times when cars stopped at the gate he had looked through the scope. And so many times he had to relax his trigger finger. It was nearly eight, and the policeman still hadn't made his appearance."
quote: "Then another vehicle turned in, at the T-junction of Vriende and Buitenkant Streets, and he saw the blue lights on the van's roof and the SAPS colours and emblem."
quote: "He felt an irresistible urge to slam the sliding gap in the side panel shut – at that moment it seemed gigantic, a gaping wound."
quote: "The patrol vehicle moved beyond his field of vision. He listened, turning his head to hear better. The sound of an engine, the hiss of tyres on the tar."
quote: "The engine sound seemed quieter, and he thought they must have stopped."
quote: "Nyathi said they had called Brigadier Musad Manie to Pretoria. 'To go and explain what the National Director called \"this fiasco in Cape Town\".'"
quote: "A flurry of growling indignation and anger passed through the room. Nyathi hushed them. 'The brigadier asked me to tell you this summons in no way reflects on your hard work and exceptional efforts. He had to make some big decisions today, he made them on his own, and he knew there were certain risks involved—'"
quote: "More cries from the floor. Nyathi held up his hand for calm. 'Please, let me finish. He knew about the risks, and he's confident that top management will understand when he explains the circumstances. He asked you to continue with the same dedication and vigour you have shown under very difficult circumstances, and he wants you to know that he absolutely believes in our ability to crack these cases. I am in complete agreement. Now, let's see where we are. Benny?'"
quote: "Griessel stood up slowly, the guilt bearing down heavily on him. Manie had to take the brunt of the fact that he had not achieved anything. With Kotko. With everything. And what could he tell them now, when he himself had no idea what to do?"
quote: "He stood beside Nyathi. 'I'm sorry, Colonel,' he said."
quote: "He stood there, searching for words, searching for an approach that would not make him look like a fool, aware of the fact that his view might not be correct, that he could make an even bigger mess."
quote: "He cleared his throat. He said, 'We will have to take another look at Kotko, because we're missing something. He's in the middle of something. Something to do with the shooter, with Sloet, with...' He nearly mentioned John Afrika by name, and then realised it was probably not common knowledge. '... to do with the allegations against the SAPS, with the deals, the lawyers. And I don't think it's just coincidence.'"
quote: "'I want to look at the Fischer report again, Colonel. I want us to go through Kotko's cellphone records from the beginning again, every person that he talked to in December and January. Look at all the hotel videos again. Go and stand in that hotel room to see if there's any way to slip out. See if any of the city's street cameras can tell us anything. We'll have to show photos of Kotko and his men around Sloet's apartment block. We'll have to talk to Silbersteins again, about their meeting with Kotko on the eighteenth. I was not present at Pruis's interrogation...'"
quote: "'I felt that way too. The thing is, there are just too many coincidences. Sloet's death on the day of that meeting. Kotko's background. His calls. The photo that the shooter sent. The involvement of... a SAPS member. And not one of us believes in coincidences.'"
quote: "He couldn't think of anything else. 'That's all I have, Colonel.'"
quote: "'Thank you, Benny. People, our biggest enemy at the moment is fatigue. We have been under tremendous pressure, most of you have not slept much in the last forty-eight hours, and now I can see how tired you are. None of us is thinking clearly any more. The brigadier and I discussed this at length, and we both came to the conclusion that there is not much we can do tonight. We suggest that you all spend an hour or two with your families, and then get some rest. Let's come back here early tomorrow morning, let's say six o'clock, and take a new, fresh look at things. We have a skeleton staff on the night shift, if there is another shooting victim tonight, we will unfortunately have to call in the CATS team... Where is Mbali...?'"
quote: "They laughed, more from a release of tension than spite."
quote: "'That's what we should all be doing,' said Nyathi. 'People...' He took a few steps forward and his voice softened, 'get some rest. If we can break this case tomorrow, we'll go a long way towards strengthening our commanding officer's hand. Let's do it for him. Please.' The last word was an undisguised plea."
quote: "Mbali sat at a little table in the corner of the big warehouse."
quote: "She watched the PCSI, the elite forensic team, busy inspecting Frikkie de Vos's furniture. To one side, with his hands on his hips, stood the frustrated owner of the auctioneers company."
quote: "Mbali looked down at the notes she was busy making. It was a timeline, in her small, neat handwriting."
quote: "And right at the bottom, her strongest intuition, the key to tracing the shooter. She underlined it. Three times."
quote: "Only at half past ten did the PCSI team leader walk over to her. 'There is no doubt,' he said. 'Someone wiped all the furniture very carefully. There's absolutely nothing.'"
quote: "There was a missed call on his cellphone, after the meeting. ALEXA the screen had said."
quote: "He went to fetch his laptop from IMC and walked to his office to get the Fischer report to read at home."
quote: "On the desk, positioned so that he couldn't miss it, lay a printout. Cellphone records. With a note from Fick."
quote: "That was not a random photo from Rag. This was his daughter's boyfriend."
quote: "The sniper's limbs were stiff, his backside numb, and his back sore from sitting awkwardly. The adrenaline had come and gone, the tension ebbed and flowed. He had considered leaving many times in the past hour, his head telling him Griessel wasn't going to come, something had happened. His imagination had nearly made him shoot twice, two dark-haired men who looked vaguely like the detective. He was in too much of a hurry, wanted to swing the scope to the front wheel too quickly. He only just stopped himself in time."
quote: "Then he heard the car coming, in his blind spot, from east to west down Vriende Street."
quote: "He quickly rubbed his right eye, gripped the rifle, and looked through the scope."
quote: "A white BMW drove right past him, out of focus, too close."
quote: "Brake lights lighting up, in time for Nelson's Mansions."
quote: "The car turned in. The BMW stopped. He focused the cross hairs of the scope on the driver. Saw the hair. The right eye."
quote: "He felt the shock of the adrenaline surge. He had to make sure. He had enough time, nearly thirty seconds. He forced himself to look again. Was he sure, completely sure?"
quote: "Griessel dug the remote out of his jacket pocket, automatically, his head was dull. He found it, pointed it at the gate. It began to move, reluctantly."
quote: "He heard the smack, felt the light shock through the steering wheel."
quote: "Another smacking sound. Only then did everything come into focus – someone was shooting at him. The window right beside him exploded."
quote: "The sniper fired the last shot, ripped off the hiking pole strap, tossed the rifle quickly down in the tray."
quote: "He jerked up the screen between loading bed and driver's cab and jumped over into the seat."
quote: "He looked at the BMW, forty metres away, the glass glittering on the tar. Griessel was sitting there, head bowed."
quote: "He turned the key. The engine groaned and choked. It wouldn't take."
quote: "A movement out of the corner of his eye, his head whipping to the right."
quote: "He turned the key again. His whole body leaning forward in urgency and fear."
quote: "Griessel running towards him, his right hand under his jacket."
quote: "A booming shot, the bullet's crack, his window shattering, head jerking in fright, glass spraying on his face. He pulled away, tyres screeching along with the engine, desperately wrenching at the steering wheel to get out of the parking place, but not fast enough."
quote: "Griessel right beside the Chana, fist slamming against the panel, the detective screaming something, the sniper racing out of the parking spot. Another shot. A burning pain exploding in his hand. As he raced down Schoonder Street, in the side mirror he saw Griessel running, jacket flapping, pistol aimed at the Chana. He ducked instinctively, as another shot smacked into the panel van."
quote: "The corner with Myrtle Street too close, going too fast, braking too late. The tyres squealing he jerked the steering wheel, the rear end of the Chana swinging too far, the right side thumping dully against a vehicle, metal scraping on metal. Accelerator to the floor, the engine stuttering, the panel van juddering, shuddering."
quote: "Fear overwhelmed him so that he screamed, shrill, in mortal fear. Another shot cracked, further back, but he didn't hear it hit."
quote: "Then the engine was strong again suddenly and he pulled away down Myrtle, looked down at the pain in his hand."
quote: "His little finger was gone, only the bloodied stump remained."
quote: "It was just after one in the morning. The roadblocks, the feverish hunt for a red Chana with a broken window and multiple bullet holes, had produced no results."
quote: "In Vriende Street the curious, the hordes of uniforms and SAPS vehicles, and Colonel Nyathi, his brow furrowed with worry, had finally left. Only the night sounds of the city and the single patrol vehicle in front of Griessel's flat remained. Nyathi had insisted on that, against all his objections. 'They'll look after you tonight. Tomorrow we'll bring in the VIP Protection Unit.'"
quote: "He walked to the vehicle. He told the two sergeants that he wanted to stand on the corner one last time."
quote: "They looked at him wide-eyed, full of respect for 'the one who had survived the shooter'. The JOC leader of the Sloet investigation."
quote: "He paced off the distance again, and looked back at the gate."
quote: "Two tyres shot out, one after the other. And then, the shot that had missed him, because at that instant, when he'd realised he was being fired at, he'd jerked back his head."
quote: "He suppressed his rage at the shooter until he was back in his flat. Only then did he let out a single fierce four-letter word."
quote: "He showered and went to sit at the kitchen counter with the report on Makar Kotko from Jack Fischer and Associates. He knew he'd never be able to sleep now."
quote: "Towards the end of it he had to read some paragraphs and whole pages over again, his concentration flagging."
quote: "When he finally went to bed, close to three o'clock, it was with a reluctant respect for the Russian. A man who had to make his career in the backwaters of Africa, hellholes of civil war, poor infrastructure, corruption, poverty, disease and wretchedness."
quote: "A man who had to make do with the flotsam and jetsam of KGB personnel who weren't good enough for the espionage hot-spots of the First World. Who had to tread on eggshells, walk a tightrope between the minor and major tribal and national conflicts, foreign ideologies, who had to use some fancy footwork to navigate between the conceit and greed and power-hunger of the despots of the Dark Continent, who constantly came and went, and always played the West and East off against each other."
quote: "He lay on the bed and thought that it could have been the weapon that was used to murder Hanneke Sloet. But with a single swift stab in the torso. That last fact, in his world, made a big difference."
quote: "This time, Kotko hadn't done his own dirty work."
quote: "When the eastern horizon began to change colour, in the veld beside the old Atlantis railway line, the sniper lifted the mountain bike out of the Chana."
quote: "Pain shot through his hand. The pills, meant for headaches, were of little help. The wound had begun bleeding under the bandage again. The long, traumatic night had taken its toll. But he had to finish the job."
quote: "He propped the bicycle against a Port Jackson tree, came back, opened the cans of petrol one by one, and poured the fluid over the panel van – the engine, the cab, the interior. Difficult work with the injured hand."
quote: "He stood and watched the flames bloom, hesitating a moment and then enveloping the whole vehicle with a dull pop."
quote: "He walked quickly to the bicycle, put on the cycling helmet, pushed it through the sand to the dirt track, mounted, and began pedalling furiously."
quote: "He was already on the tarmac of the R304 when the petrol tank of the Chana exploded. He looked back over his shoulder, and saw the flames and smoke cloud blossom above the trees."
quote: "On the way to work he prepared for the six o'clock meeting. He would have to delegate tasks. Give the priorities to IMC. His greatest hope was that they would mine gold from the ore of Kotko's cellphone calls. If he had been dumb enough to use his usual number to negotiate a murder with a hireling."
quote: "Nyathi was waiting for him, and handed him the printouts."
quote: "Rage pierced his fatigue and he looked up at Nyathi, searching for words to express it."
quote: "They took bribes. The media should go and look at the evidence in black and white the directorate of prority crimes is corrupt they are protectiing the generals that they work for. I have to wipe out those who shed inoncent blood."
quote: "It is war now. Today I will shoot a Hawk."
quote: "Before he could take pleasure in the knowledge that stress must be to blame for those spelling mistakes, before he could say anything to express his contempt, Nyathi laid a hand on his shoulder."
quote: "'We have secured the building. But I think you should stay in the office today.'"
quote: "He argued vigorously, but to no avail. He pleaded, offered alternatives, suggested solutions."
quote: "Nyathi listened to it all as they walked to the big parade room. Then he just shook his head."
quote: "There was rebellion in the room. It was borne on the aggressive voices of nearly thirty detectives, the undertone of controlled rage at the shooter, his emails, his attack on a colleague. And the DPCI's lack of action. 'Where is Mbali?' came the accusing question."
quote: "Nyathi struggled to silence them. He sketched the safety precautions, cautioned them to be careful."
quote: "Griessel stood up. First, they insisted on hearing from his own lips about the night before. His account drew out a rumble of indignation."
quote: "The ever-friendly, ever-restrained Nyathi stood up, so obviously upset that silence was immediate and overwhelming."
quote: "'Is this what we do? When we are shot at by madmen, and the media, and the top brass? Is this what we do? When our commanding officer is fighting for his career in Pretoria? You should be ashamed of yourselves. While you were sleeping, Captain Kaleni worked. Straight through the night. She has followed leads the rest of us missed. She is hunting down this dog who is shooting us, and I think she just might catch the bastard before this day is out. So shut up. And show some respect.'"
quote: "When Griessel began to talk again, he had their full attention."
quote: "The day's work began with renewed energy, activated by Nyathi's words, and a female detective who had put them all to shame."
quote: "The day's work began with so much promise when the SAPS station at Melkbosstrand informed them that they had found the burned-out Chana."
quote: "At half past six they phoned in the engine number, and Nyathi, Mbali and Griessel sat watching the IMC screens as they searched for the name of the owner on the vehicle registry system."
quote: "Neville Alistair Webb. Fifty-five years old. Langley Road in Wynberg."
quote: "They sent the task force to bring him in, acutely aware of the urgent need to make progress."
quote: "At 8.12 they shoved the short, dismayed and protesting Webb into Mbali's office. 'I didn't do anything, I didn't do anything,' he said, red in the face."
quote: "'Please do not swear, Mr Webb. What did you know?'"
quote: "'No, I don't know. And you know what, I don't care. I really don't care. Because he paid me cash, and I paid my debts, and what he did with the bloody van is his problem, not mine.'"
quote: "'You had better start caring, Mr Webb. The vehicle was used in the shooting of several police officers, one of whom was killed.'"
quote: "'No, you may not. You break down my door like barbarians, you assault me in my house like a criminal, in front of my wife, you drag me here, and you're trying to blame me for making a perfectly legal sale of my legally owned property? And then you expect me to speak in a civilised manner? Bullshit. If I could still afford a lawyer, I would have called him, and sued your arses. So here's what I'm going to do. I'm going to tell you what happened, and then I'm walking out of here. And if you don't like that, you can shoot me. Because I really don't care any more. You hear me? I don't care.'"
quote: "'The Internet happened, that's what. Amazon and Kindles and iPads happened. You know how long I ran my bookshop? Twenty years. Put two kids through university. And then? E-books. Boom. Recession. Boom. Savings. Boom. No more Book Webb. Just one big financial mess.'"
quote: "'Look at my bank statement, for God's sake. Twenty-two thousand, in cash, last week of January.'"
quote: "'No. We had a party. Elvis was there. And Frank Sinatra. Great guy.'"
quote: "Xandra nt hapi. Bad reh ystdy. X w u. B warnd."
quote: "He was still trying to decipher Ella's SMS – it was worse than Fritz's – when his phone rang."
quote: "'Where are you, Benny?' Her voice was cold and stiff."
quote: "'You couldn't have let me know that you were back?'"
quote: "He had phoned her back. When was it, last night some time. Had he left a message? Too many things had happened, too little sleep. 'I think I left a message.'"
quote: "'You didn't say you were back. When did you get here?'"
quote: "'No. We worked till very late, I'm sorry, it was a bit crazy.'"
quote: "'Is today a bit crazy too? Or can we see each other?'"
quote: "He was trapped in the building. With too much time to think while they waited for the Kotko and de Vos cellphone reports, for the feedback from the teams that had gone out to the hotel, the city CCTV centre, to Silbersteins."
quote: "He thought about his inability to sustain any relationship. With his children, his ex, with Alexa. Was it the job, or was he the problem?"
quote: "It had to be him, because there were lots of policemen whose marriages lasted."
quote: "He thought about his inability to comprehend the Sloet case. And how Mbali Kaleni, so much younger, with much less experience, through all the chaff of Kotko and the transactions and the Trust, had seen the grain. He thought about Bones Boshigo's words yesterday. 'You're an old fox.' The only truth in that was the 'old'. He never made the connections, he never thought the whole thing through like Mbali. He was too busy playing the strong man in that cell with Kotko, too focused on his conviction that it was the Russian himself who had killed Sloet."
quote: "He had lost his touch, somewhere in the months that he was doing training and mentoring work for Afrika. And just could not shake off that rust, it was inside him, encrusted with the damage of thirteen years of drunkenness. Maybe that was why Afrika had recommended him to the Hawks. So he could rid himself of Griessel-the-toothless-jackal."
quote: "Had he ever had a worse week in his life?"
quote: "Fuck knew, he would have to pull his finger out. He would have to catch a wake-up and shake off this paralysis, never mind how far behind he was with sleep."
quote: "Later, in the afternoon, all their other theories toppled one by one, like dominoes."
quote: "It was Griessel who took the calls, who had to pass on the news. From Silbersteins, the Cullinan Hotel, and the city CCTV control centre, that the teams were coming back empty handed. Every time his heart sank further, and the desperate fatigue seeped deeper into his bones."
quote: "He was there when the spider's web of de Vos's cellphone calls – blown-up and projected onto the IMC wall – brought more disappointment. When Mbali, now practically walking in her sleep, called the widow in search of an explanation, and had to hear that 'Frikkie's crooked clients only emailed, they were too scared of cellphones'. And she didn't know which email address de Vos used, it must be on the computer somewhere."
quote: "Mbali sat in the IMC centre with her head bowed, her back turned to them, and Griessel saw her shoulders shudder at the onslaught of tears, but she did not look up."
quote: "It came some time during the drowsy depression between three and four o'clock. The long corridors were quiet, the telephones had stopped ringing, and only Fick was still busy at his computer, the irregular click of his mouse the only sound in the room."
quote: "They heard the footsteps approaching on the tiled floor, measured and weary. Nyathi, always so proud and erect, leaned against the door-jamb, his body crumpled like that of an old man, his voice barely above a whisper. 'The brigadier has just come out of the National Commissioner's office. He called to tell me that he will be facing a formal disciplinary hearing tomorrow morning at nine. He's their scapegoat. They want to suspend him.'"
quote: "Fick saw the expressions on the faces that turned towards him, the reproach and disgust."
quote: "'What, Fanie?' asked his immediate boss, Captain Philip van Wyk, crossly."
quote: "'But I looked at calls received. I... there was nothing else to do...'"
quote: "'Victoria West?' said Griessel, dumbfounded, because that didn't fit any scenario."
quote: "'Give me the number,' said Mbali, and pulled the phone on the desk closer."
quote: "She pressed the button. They all listened to it ringing."
quote: "'South African Police Service, Victoria West,' a woman's voice answered."
quote: "'This is Captain Mbali Kaleni, Directorate of Priority Crime Investigations in Cape Town. I would like to speak to your station commander, please.'"
quote: "'May I speak to the station commander?' Mbali asked sternly, suspecting a practical joker."
quote: "'This is Captain Mbali Kaleni, Directorate of Priority Crime Investigations in Cape Town. I am investigating the shooting of several police officers this past week...'"
quote: "'Yes,' said Mbali. 'So I don't have to tell you how urgent this is.'"
quote: "'Someone from your station called the cellphone number of a Mr Frederik 'Frikkie' de Vos on the nineteenth and twentieth of January, and left voicemail messages. Mr de Vos owned an accounting firm in Edgemead in Cape Town, and is involved in this case. I need to know who it is that called, and why.'"
quote: "She read the number slowly, every word formed with care, as if she was talking to a child."
quote: "A train rattled past on the far side of Tienie Meyer Street, on the way to Bellville station."
quote: "'I'm putting on Sergeant Sollie Barends. Tell the woman, Wingnut.'"
quote: "'Hello, this is Sergeant Sollie.' It was a younger voice, uncertain, as though finding the occasion quite overwhelming."
quote: "'Hold on.' Mbali turned to Griessel. 'Can you talk to him?'"
quote: "He nodded, shifted his chair quickly up to the table and said in Afrikaans, 'Sollie this is Captain Benny Griessel. What do you know about the call?'"
quote: "'OK. Captain, it was me who called that de Vos.'"
quote: "'The triple-two, Captain.' Something happened in the IMC centre, intangible and inaudible, a subtle electric charge."
quote: "'A hundred kilometres from us here. Little place. But the farm is only seventy.'"
quote: "'It took her two months to realise the rifle was missing?'"
quote: "'That's what I asked her too, Captain. She said she didn't need the rifle. And she didn't have the heart to clean up the Oom's workroom.'"
quote: "'Why did she get someone from the Cape to do the books?'"
quote: "'That's what Oom Henning told her to do. In the letter.'"
quote: "'That would be the letter he left. Along with his will.'"
quote: "'He said she can get married again, but just not to Willem Potgieter. Potgieter is the neighbour there. A bachelor. He and Oom Henning had a big fight...'"
quote: "'Only Frikkie de Vos was allowed to come and do the books.'"
quote: "'She said it could only be him, the rest of the time the Oom's workroom was locked. So I phoned de Vos, but he never answered his phone. I sent letters too.'"
quote: "'You're absolutely sure this Oom Henning owned a triple-two?'"
quote: "'Yes, Captain. A Sako, three years old. Receipt is on the farm, the licence, everything.'"
quote: "'Sollie, we think this Samuel could be the shooter. Solomon.'"
quote: "'So you must tell me everything you know about him.'"
quote: "'But I really don't know anything,' said Sollie nervously, the anxiety that he might let them down almost audible on the line."
quote: "'No, Captain, there are farm people too. The aunty is still farming.'"
quote: "'Sollie, thank you very much. You're a good detective...'"
quote: "'This is Benny Griessel, Leonard. We need your help badly now.'"
quote: "'The first thing is, send Sollie and your best fingerprint man back to Aunty Jacky. To the room the man slept in. Tell them to work very carefully, tell them we want every last print. And then they must race back and send them to us.'"
quote: "'But while they are there, get Sollie to talk to everyone on the farm. Every single one. Everything they can remember about the man. Everything. Anything. His surname, his appearance, his clothes, his car. And send all the other people you can spare to Vosburg. House-to-house, anyone who might have seen the man. Maybe he filled up with petrol there, or had a meal, or something.'"
quote: "'Leonard, our problem is time. You'll have to be thorough, but you'll have to be fast.'"
quote: "The word spread through the Hawks' building like wildfire – there was hope, there might be a breakthrough – so that the IMC room was soon overflowing, and Colonel Nyathi had to ask everyone to please go and wait in the parade room, he would personally let them know if there was any news."
quote: "But Cupido made himself at home at Griessel's side, as though he belonged there. And Bones Boshigo said, 'Colonel, you might need someone who understands the art of bookkeeping,' and planted himself, leaning against the wall."
quote: "By five o'clock the IMC night shift arrived. The day shift did not want to leave. Van Wyk didn't have the heart to force them, but Nyathi put his foot down, 'We need you to be fully rested tomorrow, we don't know if this will bear any fruit. Please.'"
quote: "They dawdled, wasting time. It was twenty past five before the last one went home."
quote: "The sniper put the late Oom Henning Delport's triple-two Sako rifle in the boot of the Audi, closed it carefully with his left hand and walked around to the driver's door."
quote: "He was dressed in black – he might have to stand in the dark shadows of the trees beside the railway line, if it got late. If he couldn't get a clean shot from the car."
quote: "He got into the silver car. The pain in his right hand was constant and sharp, especially when he didn't keep the hand raised. He had gulped down a handful of headache pills at ten – he didn't dare walk into a pharmacy with this wound and ask for anything stronger. He didn't know whether Griessel knew that he'd been injured. He had lain down, between eleven and three, slept maybe forty minutes, waking often, panicked, bathed in sweat. No more painkillers. He had to be alert now."
quote: "Sergeant Sollie Barends, detective of the SAPS at Victoria West, went by the nickname of 'Wingnut', because of his very prominent ears."
quote: "'Aunty, the police are looking for him down in the Cape. For terrible things. I'm asking Aunty please to think nicely about then.'"
quote: "'Rita,' she called to one of the ageing maids standing at the stove, stirring a big pot full of boiling fig jam. 'Did he wear glasses?'"
quote: "'No, I wouldn't say a sports car. But, you know, flattish.'"
quote: "'He shot policemen. Didn't Aunty see that on the TV? The Solomon shooter...'"
quote: "'There's no signal here. Then Oom Henning said he wants to get a satellite dish. Six hundred rand a month. So we can sit and watch naked people swearing. Six hundred. I put my foot down.'"
quote: "She tossed another peeled fig into the big white enamel dish. As though it had suddenly occurred to her. 'Shot policemen?'"
quote: "'That's not right. Policemen. Just making a living like everyone.'"
quote: "'Aunty...' said Sollie Barends, the urgency of the case pressing on him."
quote: "'And don't you stand at the door and listen.'"
quote: "The sergeant crossed over to her side. 'Lift your hand.'"
quote: "'What I am going to hear now, I will never repeat.'"
quote: "The cellphone signal came and went. They heard the hiss of a vehicle, and Sergeant Sollie Barends's voice over the loudspeaker."
quote: "'The aunty said... swear on my mother's... with Potgieter. For years... who it is—'"
quote: "'Sollie,' said Griessel, and got no response. 'Sollie, can you hear me?'"
quote: "'Sollie, stop. If you can hear, stop where there is signal.'"
quote: "'Yes,' said Griessel. 'We couldn't make out what you were saying.'"
quote: "'Captain, the aunty made me swear on my mother's life I wouldn't tell. But my mother will understand, it's a matter of life and death.'"
quote: "'No, Captain, she said she told him he was lying, he was just jealous, she didn't want to hear.'"
quote: "'Sollie, you'd better get moving then,' said Griessel. 'As quickly as you can.'"
quote: "The sniper parked under the tree, against the fence along the railway line."
quote: "The branches hung low over the Audi, the foliage dense and green."
quote: "He surveyed the area. The station was only twenty metres away, but the path led people to Ford Street. Nobody would see him."
quote: "He got out, walked around to the boot. Looked around again."
quote: "No eyes or attention on him. He opened the boot, took out the plastic bucket, snapped open the lid. He bent, scooped the mud out with his hand and smeared it over the number plate. Walked around to the front number plate, repeated the process. Put the bucket away in the boot. Made sure once again that there were no people around."
quote: "He wiped his hands clean on the cloth, picked the rifle up with his left hand, pressed the boot shut. The pain in his hand was agonising. He walked back, climbed quickly into the car. Pressed the barrel of the gun down into the foot well of the passenger seat."
quote: "Only then did he look up, at the entrance to the building."
quote: "Not the Chana. Not what he had planned. The risk was higher. But it would only take one shot. And he knew the maze-like escape route off by heart."
quote: "The clock on the IMC wall ticked past six o'clock."
quote: "Cupido was talking. He was the only one. He was going on about how it would be someone from Silbersteins. He listed the reasons. They were the spider, right in the middle of this web. They connected Kotko and Sloet and Afrika and the shooter. They were in minerals and stuff. He was sure they did business up there in Vosburg too, what with the oil in the Karoo."
quote: "Griessel dashed out to go and relieve himself. He knew the telephones would ring as soon as he left the room."
quote: "When he hurried back, at nineteen minutes past six, still nothing had happened."
quote: "'Captain, this is Sollie, Captain.' Despite the static on the line they could hear the tone of his voice, the note of apology, as though he was conscious he was about to disappoint them all."
quote: "'Captain, he's seventy-six, his glasses are as thick as the bottom of a Coke bottle... I think he must have seen wrong, it can't be right.'"
quote: "'No, the Chev case. The cook. The woman who cooked food.'"
quote: "'The chef?' asked Cupido loudly, he couldn't help it."
quote: "'That's right. The cheffff,' the sergeant over-corrected. 'What was her name?'"
quote: "Griessel's mind wanted to discount what he'd just heard, it didn't make any sense."
quote: "'No, man,' said Cupido disappointed. 'It can't be. He was a consultant. At KPMG.'"
quote: "'Bookkeepers,' said Mbali, and the hope and excitement penetrated her voice. 'Auditors. What was his name?'"
quote: "'He hates...' said Griessel and looked at the spot where Fanie Fick usually sat. Fick the investigating officer in the Steyn case. Fick, with his hangdog tail-between-the-legs-bloodhound-eyes who was a daily reminder of the massive errors of that case."
quote: "'At the Drunken Duck,' said Griessel. Where Fick went every afternoon after work. Benny knew the place. In the past he had frequently drowned his own sorrows there."
quote: "But no 'thank you', no 'good work, Fickie', no 'of course you must stay until we find out what's going on'. No, just pack it up, stack it up, and bugger off. Go to bed, see you in the morning."
quote: "Because he was Fanie 'Fucked' Fick. No one really wanted to know him."
quote: "Cupido raced like a madman down Voortrekker Street, siren wailing, lights flashing. The traffic was mercifully light."
quote: "'Last night. He missed me on purpose. So he could send the email. To me. But he didn't mention my name to the media.'"
quote: "'Benny, I don't know what you're talking about.'"
quote: "He took out his Z88, held it in his hand."
quote: "Time to go home. To his wife. And his two daughters."
quote: "Because he drank. Because he had gone rotten. Given up."
quote: "They never would understand. This albatross that was hung around his neck. He would never get rid of it as long as he was in the police. For the rest of his life, he would be the one who had fucked up the Steyn case. Put an innocent man through hell. Nobody remembered the inhuman pressure from Estelle Steyn's parents, top management, and the media, nobody remembered the support and encouragement of the commanding officers, the forensic unit, the public prosecutors."
quote: "He stood up, said goodbye to the barman. Walked to the door."
quote: "He was the scapegoat, sacrificed on the altar of the SAPS."
quote: "Just as they wanted to do with Manie now. That's why he had felt no sympathy there in the IMC room. That's the way this miserable system worked."
quote: "Someone had to go down in flames, take the blame."
quote: "Captain Fanie Fick. With his stiff upright walk, the concentrated attempt to hide his intoxication."
quote: "The sirens were high-pitched and shrill, just behind, where Voortrekker became Strand Weg."
quote: "He breathed out, pulled the trigger, his body flooding with a sense of immense relief. The rifle bucked in his hands and Fanie Fick fell."
quote: "Griessel saw the body lying on the concrete seam between Keast Street and the parking area, and he cursed. Cupido saw the movement, a glimpse of something beyond Francis Road, between the trees, a car behind dark foliage, on the station side. He raced over the island, the police car slamming against the kerb, bouncing and sliding across the sand and the meagre grass. He shouted, 'There's the fucker!'"
quote: "A surreal sound, a cellphone ringing, and Griessel realised it was his. Alexa, he swore it was Alexa, fate's crazy timing."
quote: "A flash of faster movement behind the trees, Cupido spun the steering wheel, he would have to cut him off. The back of the car skidded in the sand, the wheels losing traction, then he was on the tar, squealing tyres, shooting forward into Loumar Road. He hit the Audi, bonnet angled to bonnet, airbags exploding. They jerked forward against the seat belts, the crash echoing in their ears, tearing metal, shattering glass."
quote: "Griessel's cellphone rang again. He tried to get out, but the airbag was pressing him tightly. He was winded, blinded. The bastard was going to get away, he had to get out. He lifted the Z88, shot a hole in the airbag, fumbled for the handle, wrenched the door open, leaped out. The Audi was right next to him. He saw Brecht still behind the wheel, his face grim. The right hand, white bandage wound around it, reached for something."
quote: "Griessel aimed his pistol. 'Pick up the gun!' he screamed, because he wanted to shoot the fucker. 'Pick up the gun!'"
quote: "'Radio for an ambulance!' shouted Griessel. 'And go and help Fanie!'"
quote: "The news of Fanie Fick's death added a ruthlessness to the interrogation."
quote: "Mbali spoke, and Griessel sat and stared at Brecht. The cold, emotionless eyes, the brooding silence, the distance that said he had only scorn for them. That reserve, as though he carried secrets with him, even now, here, undeniably guilty. Griessel could understand why Fanie Fick had been so sure of his case back then."
quote: "Mbali laid out the evidence against him in a relentless voice. She said they knew he had stolen the rifle from a farm near Vosburg. They knew he had bought the Chana. They would investigate his computer forensically, they would connect him to everything. They would prove that the whole thing, from the moment he sent the first email to John Afrika, was part of a strategy to avoid the investigative spotlight when he shot Captain Fanie Fick. His Bible quotes and right-wing rhetoric were deliberately misleading, part of his big lie. They knew now why he had played the game with the police and the press, why he had been so careful in relaying the information about 'the communist'. Because he was unsure whether de Vos's widow knew about his and her husband's contracts. Everything made sense now. She said, 'I am going to do my best to remove you from society for as long as possible, because you are a premeditating, cold-blooded murderer.'"
quote: "'Now we know Captain Fanie Fick was right. You killed Estelle Steyn too,' she said, because that was what forensic psychologist, Captain Ilse Brody, had suggested over the phone half an hour ago."
quote: "The cuffs jangled as he gestured. 'I'm glad I shot him. I'm glad he's dead. The next time you accuse an innocent person, you'll think twice.'"
quote: "Griessel saw the gap. 'But you did that,' he said. 'You accused Makar Kotko. You found him guilty of murder, and it wasn't him.'"
quote: "'You know it was him. Did you also get paid, when you worked with Afrika?'"
quote: "'Can I call a journalist? So you can give him your proof?'"
quote: "'I will. But you can't. Because you don't have proof.'"
quote: "'I have,' he said, quite desperate. 'Hanneke Sloet came to me. She knew how he tortured people. She knew about the Trust. I showed her the payments, to the politicians, to the police. Payments that I had to cook. She said it's a disgrace what happened to me. She said someone ought to tell the media about Kotko, so that a guilty person could be arrested for a change. He killed her because he didn't want it to come out.'"
quote: "'Did you give her the original statements of the Trust?'"
quote: "'Did you tell her, if she went to the media, that you would make the statements available?'"
quote: "'Did you see payments that Kotko might have made to a professional hit man?'"
quote: "'You made a mistake, Samuel. Tell me, why did you give your second name to the old woman on the farm? Did you know there were guns on the estate?'"
quote: "'Where is your proof? Because Kotko has an alibi. His two henchmen have an alibi. Where is your proof?'"
quote: "Griessel walked to the parade room. His JOC team was waiting for news."
quote: "They sat talking, voices subdued. Fanie Fick's death hung like a shadow over the whole unit. They fell silent when he entered, looked at him expectantly."
quote: "'Tomorrow we'll start from the beginning again,' said Griessel. All he could think of now, was his bed. And the sweet bliss of sleep."
quote: "They all stood up. 'Is it true that you shot the airbag?' one asked."
quote: "'While his cellphone was ringing the whole time,' said Cupido. 'Benna, I have to know, who phoned?'"
quote: "He had forgotten about the call. 'I don't know.'"
quote: "His colleagues grinned. He took out his phone, saw the SMS that said there was voicemail. He called it up."
quote: "'People who want to get into Sloet's apartment, to test the Wi-Fi signal.'"
quote: "They walked down the passage. And Cupido stopped. 'To test the Wi-Fi signal?'"
quote: "Griessel tried to remember. 'I think they are installing it.'"
quote: "He noted Cupido's focus. He sighed, said, 'OK,' and tapped on his cell, made the call."
quote: "They walked together, Cupido's hand on the back of his neck, his head bowed. The Wandering Thinker. Griessel followed him reluctantly, hardly able to keep his eyes open. Interrogating Brecht had sapped the last of his energy."
quote: "They opened the thick case file, slid the photos out. Cupido arranged them on the desk. 'Check this,' he said, pointing a finger at one photo. It showed the table top in Sloet's bedroom. Her laptop, a few files, a fountain pen, a glass of red wine, nearly empty, an Apple iPhone. Close to it was the brown high-backed chair and the brown standard lamp, switched on."
quote: "He didn't understand. 'What am I looking at, Vaughn?'"
quote: "'She sent the email, to that big deal maker, just before ten?'"
quote: "'But how, Benna? No cellular dongle, no wireless. And it's an old iPhone that, they can't do Wi-Fi hotspots.'"
quote: "'No, Lithpel Davids' report confirmed it. The mail was sent.'"
quote: "'Benna, I think this laptop has a built-in 3G modem.'"
quote: "'It's like a built-in cellphone, but it connects with the Internet on the cellular network. If you take the SIM card out and put it in a phone, and you put money on it, you can make voice calls too.'"
quote: "'She could have made calls that we don't know about. Or received them, from Mr Fucking Kotko. Lithpel missed a trick, canny coloured, that bro', but nobody's perfect. Let me give him a call.'"
quote: "It was after eleven when Lithpel phoned back. He said of course Sloet's Dell Latitude D630 had a built-in 3G HSPDA 3.66GHz Tri-band Embedded Mobile Broadband card in it. But Tommy Nxesi's original request was just that he should look at emails sent, websites visited, documents created – and any of the aforementioned that might have been deleted. And that is what he had done. He assumed that the detective knew about the card, and 'it's not my job to do on-site training'."
quote: "Could he see if there was a call history on the card?"
quote: "Yes, he could see, but there was nothing. Someone could have deleted it."
quote: "Could he see what the number on the SIM card was?"
quote: "Of course he could. And he gave them the number, which they duly handed over to the IMC night shift, to start their well-oiled procedure to acquire a two-oh-five subpoena. And then beg their contact at Vodacom to give them rapid, urgent access to call records this one last time."
quote: "Which all only came through at twenty past twelve, when the exhaustion was greater than the anticipation, and Griessel lay sleeping, his head on his hands."
quote: "Cupido woke him. 'No calls, but a whole lot of SMSes to one particular number,' he said. 'All the time, for months. And also on the night of the murder.'"
quote: "'Fuck,' said Griessel, and tried to rub the sleep from his eyes."
quote: "They sat watching the operator trying to match the number with all the suspects they had on the system. And found nothing."
quote: "'Let's look at RICA,' the operator said, because the new Regulation of Interception Act should have all the details of owners of SIM cards."
quote: "Seven minutes of waiting. The name and address appeared on the screen."
quote: "They stopped in front of the big wrought-iron gates in Hohenhort Avenue, Constantia."
quote: "Cupido was in the driver's seat, and nudged Griessel, 'Benna, are you awake?'"
quote: "Cupido pressed the button of the intercom repeatedly, each jab punctuated with a 'Hello? Hello?'"
quote: "It took nearly ten minutes to elicit a response. Henry van Eeden's voice, sleepy and irritable. 'What is it?'"
quote: "Griessel leaned across so the video eye could see him. 'Mr van Eeden, this is Benny Griessel, I was here just the other day.'"
quote: "The exterior lights of the house lit up as they approached. The paved parking area was empty, the Lamborghini probably cosily tucked away in the garage."
quote: "They got out, Griessel walked in front, along the path, up the steps. The catnaps he had taken in the office and the car had only made him feel even more dull. He shook his head, as if to shake the cobwebs out."
quote: "Van Eeden opened the door. He was dressed in a white dressing gown with a burgundy Oriental dragon motif. Barefoot. 'Captain, what's going on?'"
quote: "Van Eeden put out his hand. Cupido ignored it. The man frowned, led the way to a sitting room, switched on lights. Modern and in good taste. 'Please sit down. Can I put coffee on?'"
quote: "Van Eeden sat down, leaning forward, elbows on knees. 'I take it this couldn't have waited till morning.'"
quote: "'Mr van Eeden, I will ask you again, where were you on the evening of the eighteenth of January?' Griessel asked."
quote: "'I told you I was in Somerset West. I gave a speech. In front of three hundred people. Didn't you talk to the congress people?'"
quote: "He hadn't. That was one of the things that had escaped him, in the hurly-burly of the investigation. Griessel took out his notebook, paged through it until he found the SIM card number. 'Does this number look familiar?' He read it to van Eeden."
quote: "Van Eeden deliberated for a moment. 'No,' he said, shaking his head innocently from side to side."
quote: "A light went on in the passage outside the door, and then someone appeared in the doorway. Griessel recognised her, van Eeden's wife, the lovely, serene woman who reminded him of Alexa. He couldn't recall her name."
quote: "'This is Captain Griessel, Annemarie. I'm not sure what's going on.' She looked at Griessel. 'Evening, ma'am.'"
quote: "She hesitated for a moment. Then she turned around and walked out."
quote: "'It's a cellphone number registered in your name,' said Griessel."
quote: "'On the RICA database,' said Cupido, aggressively, now spoiling for a fight. 'Which means you presented your ID. In person.'"
quote: "'Captain, you have my cellphone number. You know this is not mine.'"
quote: "'Just the one cellphone. There are quite a few land lines.'"
quote: "'Do you have a cellular modem? For your laptop?' asked Cupido."
quote: "'They do. Can you fetch the modem, along with your laptop?'"
quote: "'Just a minute.' He stood up and walked out through one of the doors."
quote: "Cupido looked at the art on the walls. 'And they call this art,' he said. 'My six-year-old cousin could do better.'"
quote: "Griessel looked. Abstract. Vaguely familiar. He stood up, went closer."
quote: "Van Eeden came walking back. He carried the laptop carefully. The black modem, with a yellow MTN logo, was protruding from the side."
quote: "Van Eeden put the laptop down on the coffee table, pressed a button. 'I didn't know they had numbers,' he said."
quote: "They waited in uncomfortable silence for the computer to start up."
quote: "Van Eeden slid a finger over the mouse panel, and tapped."
quote: "Van Eeden got halfway, then he looked up at Griessel. 'I didn't realise...'"
quote: "'You will agree that it is the same number as the one that we read out to you.'"
quote: "'Where was the laptop on the night of the eighteenth of January?'"
quote: "'That's right. My notes for the speech were on it.'"
quote: "'The modem was there too. I always put it in the case along with the laptop.'"
quote: "'So the laptop and the modem and you were in Somerset West?'"
quote: "'Well, the dinner was from seven o'clock. I must have been at the hotel from just before seven.'"
quote: "'Then I gave my presentation, nine o'clock. Nine to ten. But there were a lot of questions, I only got away at half past ten.'"
quote: "'And the laptop and the modem were with you the whole time?'"
quote: "Cupido laughed, a laugh of delight. Hehehehe. 'Genuine?' he said."
quote: "'Now, that modem, on the same night, all on its own, as if by magic, out of the case, sent forty-seven SMSes to Hanneke Sloet. Between six-twenty-one and nine-nineteen.'"
quote: "'Maybe not on earth. Maybe divine intervention.' Griessel could hear Cupido was firing on all cylinders now. He must have known his colleague would relish interrogating a super-rich white man who was lying through his teeth. 'Cause the mystery deepens,' said Cupido. 'In the past three months, that innocent little modem sent Hanneke Sloet an average of seventeen text messages a day. And on the night of the murder, lo and behold, they were not only sent, but they all registered on the cellular tower here, near your house. Constantia. How do you explain that?'"
quote: "Henry van Eeden could not explain it. 'Someone must have cloned the number or... what do you call it when they take over control?'"
quote: "'Captain, that's quite a broad statement. Miss Sloet and I communicated often, in various ways...'"
quote: "Now it was Miss Sloet, Griessel noted. When he and Bones were here, van Eeden had talked of Hanneke."
quote: "'So you have SMSed her from your little laptop after all?' asked Cupido."
quote: "'May have. To the tune of seventeen a day. But not that evening?'"
quote: "'While your laptop was switched off? In its bag? In Somerset West?'"
quote: "'This mystery hacker goes to all that trouble, to have an SMS conversation with someone you know personally?'"
quote: "'And she likes it so much that she sends a whole bunch of SMSes back to the hacker?'"
quote: "'That's your story, and you're sticking to it?' Disbelieving."
quote: "Then Annemarie van Eeden came in with a tray. 'Henry, what's going on?' she asked."
quote: "'It's a misunderstanding,' her husband said, uncomfortably, rising to take the tray from her."
quote: "She looked at van Eeden. Griessel saw the expression, fleeting, as though just for a second she saw a future without the peace of mind that this wealth, this massive estate, the beautiful house, afforded. That's the problem with having money, you never stop worrying about losing it."
quote: "Then she brushed her husband's cheek with her fingertips, a tender touch, full of love. 'I am sure you will,' she said, and left the room with her usual grace."
quote: "Van Eeden put the tray down on the table. 'Help yourself,' he said."
quote: "Cupido solemnly took out his cellphone, the HTC Desire HD of which he was so proud, and put it down on the table."
quote: "'We didn't just drive up to your magnificent gates for some social chitchat. We are the Hawks, pappie. We've got our ducks in a row. Captain Benna, wily old veteran that he is, remembered you were scared Hanneke Sloet would steal your job...'"
quote: "Van Eeden grimaced in protest, but Cupido silenced him with a wave of the hand. 'Captain Benna also reckons that you're the kingpin, the main man, the big dog deal maker, the Big Mac of the whole BEE place, you're the one who stands to score the sweetest if it goes through, but you're also the biggest loser when it all goes south. If the Russian Mafia involvement and pension fund fraud and all that ugly stuff gets into the media. But the thing I think will make up the judge's mind, the critical factor, as they say in the classics, is the fact that you purposely, knowingly and wilfully withheld information pertinent to a murder investigation. That's what's gonna nail you.'"
quote: "Van Eeden shook his head, slowly and with righteous indignation."
quote: "Van Eeden was poker-faced, only his pallor betrayed him."
quote: "'Now, if my HTC Desire HD smartphone, running on Google Android two point two Froyo, powered by the cellular giant Vodacom, if this phone rings, it means the judge said, open up those servers. Let the light of truth and justice shine upon the rich man's messages. Then, pappie, you're going to need more than divine intervention. Like, maybe, a very good lawyer.'"
quote: "'Oh, and did I forget to mention, along with the article two-oh-five, we applied for a search warrant too. So things are going to be a little busy around here pretty soon.'"
quote: "Van Eeden's gaze flicked from the phone to Griessel."
quote: "'Is there something you want, Mr van Eeden?' he asked."
quote: "Van Eeden's whole body shuddered. With a sweeping gesture Cupido picked up the HTC, swiped the screen, held it to his ear. 'This is your captain speaking,' he answered."
quote: "The millionaire suddenly leaped to his feet. 'I had an affair with Hanneke,' he said."
quote: "'Hold your horses,' said Cupido over the phone. 'The rich man's coming clean.'"
quote: "He walked as he talked, pacing back and forth across the spacious room. The words came with difficulty, as though he had forgotten where he had hidden them. There were silences, when he looked in the direction where his wife had disappeared from the room."
quote: "It began in December 2009, only a week after he and Hanneke Sloet had met for the first time at a work-related meeting. He said it was 'inevitable', a 'whirlwind', they were 'soulmates'. And, after a long pause, it was a hugely physical attraction that bowled them both over."
quote: "He said after the first time, in the Cape Grace, in a room that he'd booked at the last minute, they met in hotels, in Johannesburg, in Cape Town. A few times in her apartment in Stellenbosch, but it was tense, they were never sure whether her friend, Roch, might turn up. They were careful. Discreet. He often left his cellphone lying around in this house, he was too afraid to use it for SMS communication, sure that he would forget to delete something some time. Hanneke's phone was often left with her personal assistant when she was in Silberstein meetings. That's why they had decided on the computer SMSes."
quote: "A year ago, in February 2010, she decided to break off her relationship with Roch. Van Eeden was opposed to this, because despite the intensity of the affair he had no long-term plans. But she was honest. She wanted him. She insisted on more time with him, she was unhappy about the fact that they could never be seen in public together, she upped the pressure on him to get a divorce. He thought he could handle it, that it would burn itself out, would blow over. Until she had her breasts enlarged. All because one afternoon after 'a session' he confessed that he liked large breasts. That was when he realised she was more determined than he had thought. And then she gave him the photographs. That she had had taken for him. He didn't know what to do with them. He locked them in his office safe, and two days after her death he cut them up and burned them. He kept one. Only one. Which they would find in his safe."
quote: "And in January she had moved to the city, so that they could see each other more easily and more often. She had a key to her front door made for him. And then she began to pressurise him. They had been together a year already, they were sure they were in love with each other. It was time for him to get a divorce. It was time for them, without shame, to be together for ever."
quote: "Then he had to tell her he wasn't prepared to do that."
quote: "On the evening of the eighteenth she informed him by SMS that she was going to see Annemarie, his wife. She was going to tell her everything. If he didn't have the courage to end his marriage, then she would do it for him."
quote: "He stood up. 'Come and see.' He led them to his study, a magnificent room of bookshelves and glass display cases with true-to-life models of old wooden ships. And a sword, antique and worn, fashioned from dull greyish-brown copper. 'It's a Jian,' he said. 'Two thousand years old. The Chinese gave it to me. To say thank you.'"
quote: "Griessel asked him to return to the sitting room. He asked him to describe exactly what happened that night in Hanneke Sloet's apartment."
quote: "Van Eeden said he SMSed her to tell her he was on his way. From Somerset West. He went in through the parking garage, so that no one could see he was carrying the sword. He unlocked the door. Hanneke must have heard him, because she was standing there. And then he stabbed her. It was a dreadful moment. But he had to protect his world."
quote: "Then he put the sword down and went up to her bedroom, to delete the SMSes on her laptop. And then he wiped the floor and the door and the sink clean with a cloth he found in the kitchen."
quote: "On the way home he threw the cloth out of the car window."
quote: "'Mr van Eeden, that doesn't make sense. How do you explain the SMSes that were sent from your laptop? From here in Constantia?'"
quote: "'You have your confession, Captain. What more do you need?'"
quote: "'The problem,' said Griessel, 'is that you phoned Hanneke Sloet twice, that evening. At 22.48, a call that registered on the cell tower at Somerset West, and again at 23.01, registered on the Nyanga tower.'"
quote: "'But why did you phone her? If you were on your way there to murder her? If you wanted to surprise her?'"
quote: "'You're lying,' said Cupido. 'Because she didn't answer. So how would you know?'"
quote: "'The pathologist's report says she died closer to ten o'clock,' said Griessel. 'And he's reasonably sure, because we know exactly when she ordered a take-away and ate it that night, we know what she ate, he could track the digestion of the food accurately.'"
quote: "'How could the SMSes have been sent from here if you and your laptop were in Somerset West?'"
quote: "'Mr van Eeden, within the hour we will know what was written in those SMSes.'"
quote: "'I am not protecting anyone.' He walked up to them, his wrists held close together. 'Take me. Lock me up. You have everything that you want.'"
quote: "'He's protecting me,' said Annemarie van Eeden from the doorway."
quote: "'Henry,' she said soothingly, 'you didn't handle it very well. Sooner or later they would have realised.'"
quote: "She came in and sat down with them, with an immense inner calm."
quote: "She said she only found out about the affair early in December last year, but she had suspected it for months. There were so many telltale signs for a wife to spot."
quote: "In December, alone at home, she had walked into Henry's study, and saw the laptop unattended. And it was on. Henry, who always carefully turned off his laptop, protected it with a password, had apparently forgotten. Or maybe he had wanted her to see. Maybe he had wanted her to do something about it."
quote: "And she had begun searching deliberately, because the suspicion, the doubt was too great. She came across the SMSes. She saw how intense it was. She saw a side of Henry that she hadn't been aware of. Her husband, the dirty talker. Her husband, the sex addict."
quote: "She wrote down all the cell modem's details. She hired a private detective, who found someone to intercept the SMSes."
quote: "She received them all. For a month and a half, a flood of vulgar sex messages, like a banal bodice-ripper paperback."
quote: "And the increasing demands of 'that woman'. And Henry's reluctance to end the affair. Then she knew she was going to lose everything."
quote: "She could deduce from the messages between the woman and her husband that he had a key to her door. She went looking for it and found it in Henry's jacket pocket. She had a duplicate made, quickly one afternoon between Christmas and New Year. She knew the woman was visiting her parents, and Henry wouldn't miss it. It was without premeditation, a way of hitting back, a small triumph."
quote: "She gave him a serene smile and said, 'Henry, the courts are much more lenient to the wronged wife.'"
quote: "On that Tuesday night of the eighteenth of January, Henry left just after six, a little late, for Somerset West. He wasn't telling the truth when he said his notes were on the laptop. Henry never spoke from notes, he talked off the cuff. He was such a smooth talker. Usually."
quote: "Shortly after his departure she heard a telephone ringing, and went into Henry's office to answer it, it was the nearest room at the time. The call was insignificant, one of the garden staff was sick."
quote: "She looked up, and saw the sword in the glass case. A moment's hesitation, then everything fell into place. In her mind's eye she could see how it might unfold."
quote: "She left at about twenty to nine, with the sword on the seat beside her."
quote: "At ten o'clock she unlocked the door with her duplicate."
quote: "She lifted the sword, and with a sense of incredible relief and immense violence, she stabbed it into the woman's heart, and pulled it out. The woman fell, silent, the only sound the crack of her head hitting the floor."
quote: "She put the sword down. Because she knew the police would find it, along with the SMSes on the laptop. They would accuse Henry."
quote: "That was what she wanted. That he should be punished for the pain. She had already lost her man, it was the rest she wanted to protect."
quote: "That's when he saw that it was already nine o'clock."
quote: "'Benny,' said Colonel Nyathi, 'I know you were probably sleeping, but I just wanted you to know the brigadier is flying back this morning. The hearing was cancelled.'"
quote: "'That's good, sir,' he said in a voice croaky with sleep."
quote: "'He asked me to thank you, Benny. He will do it personally when he gets back.'"
quote: "'But it wasn't me, sir. It was Vaughn who cracked it.'"
quote: "'That's not what Vaughn is saying. Oh, and we're waiting for you before we start the meeting.'"
quote: "'Sir, my car is at work...' Cupido had dropped him off at four this morning."
quote: "He stood waiting at the gate to his block of flats for a detective from the Violent Crimes group to pick him up. He looked at the opposite corner where Brecht had sat in wait for him. He thought how he had got it all wrong."
quote: "Vaughn Cupido, who had wangled the timely phone call last night with a program on his cellphone. 'It's an Android app, Benna. Fake-Call Me.' And he still didn't know how it worked. Cupido had caught the van Eedens, and now he was giving Griessel the credit – his respect for his colleague had risen to new heights."
quote: "But it was only one of the many things that he had read incorrectly. Cupido, the shooter, the Sloet case. He had to accept that he didn't have the head for the deals, the companies, the trusts. He didn't have the knowledge of computers and cellphone modems and iPhones that couldn't 'hotspot'."
quote: "Mbali shook her head when the gathering applauded her. She waddled to the front, and then said, 'Some of you thought that I was appointed because John Afrika could manipulate me.'"
quote: "'I heard the gossip,' she said. 'I know I am not popular. I know I can be difficult to work with. I know it is not easy to have a woman around. But I want you to know nobody will manipulate me. So, let me tell you what happened in Amsterdam, so that it can be out in the open.'"
quote: "'Our hosts, the Amsterdam police, thought it would be a treat to take us on a bicycle tour of the city. And I was too proud to tell them that I cannot ride a bicycle. I did not want them to think that South Africans are backward. So I tried. And I lost my balance, and I lost my way, and I rode into a canal. They had to rescue me from that filthy water. With a boat. It must have been pretty funny. But for me it was a very big embarrassment. And then my pride kept me from laughing at myself, and I wanted to keep it a secret. But I have now learned that secrets have consequences. Next time it will be different. Thank you.'"
quote: "He phoned Carla when he arrived on the campus, and said he was there to take her to lunch. She was uncomfortable and said, 'We're in the Neelsie...' She hesitated before she invited him to join them."
quote: "He found her there, with the Neanderthal, a giant. He towered over Griessel and over Carla, as she introduced him, 'Pa, this is Calla; Calla this is my pa.'"
quote: "They sat down, Carla and the Neanderthal close together, his muscular arm around her. Carla's little hand was on the tree trunk of a leg."
quote: "'I'll look after your daughter very well,' he said."
quote: "'You'd better,' said Carla, and gazed at her rugby player with love and admiration. 'My pa is a Hawk.'"
quote: "'With a gun,' said Griessel. He wanted to say it light-heartedly, but the threat was still there."
quote: "They didn't hear him. They kissed. Right there in front of him."
quote: "He drove to his flat, collected his dirty laundry and took it to the Gardens Centre."
quote: "He sorted it in pathetic little piles in front of the washing machine. The sum total of his wardrobe."
quote: "He thought of searching Henry van Eeden's walk-in wardrobe, the row upon row of shirts and trousers, brand new and fashionable, that had been hanging there. He thought of Makar Kotko's expensive suit and shirt."
quote: "He hung the clothes up on the washing line at the block of flats. He must buy underpants, there were too many with holes. And more new shirts. Some time or other, when his credit card recovered."
quote: "In his sitting room he took out his bass guitar and sat down on the couch. He found no solace in it. It reminded him of the concert tonight, and that he wouldn't be going."
quote: "He lay down on his bed, his head filled with self-pity."
quote: "This is no life, every fucking day the same thing, he thought."
quote: "'Benny, Alexa has gone,' said Ella, shrill and anxious. 'And she has to sing at eight.'"
quote: "'We were here at her house. She was terribly nervous, since yesterday, after the bad rehearsal. She hardly slept at all. She was so stubborn, I practically had to beg her to get ready. I was in the bath, and when I came out, she was gone.'"
quote: "He found her sitting in the Mount Nelson's Planet Bar, at one of the little tables, alone. There was a bottle of gin on the table, a glass in her hand."
quote: "He first walked to the barman, unnoticed. He asked for a bottle of Jack Daniel's."
quote: "He paid, got a glass, and walked over to her. Pulled out a chair and sat down."
quote: "He picked up the bottle of Jack, and poured a full glass."
quote: "'What are you doing?' she said in a frightened voice."
quote: "She put her glass down. 'You've been clean for two hundred and twenty days.'"
quote: "'Two hundred and thirty three.' He lifted the glass to his mouth, his whole being ready for the heavenly taste."
quote: "She grabbed his arm. The liquor spilled on the table. 'Benny, you can't do it.'"
quote: "'What happened, Benny?' she asked, but she didn't let go of his arm."
quote: "'Everything happened. Fanie Fick was shot dead, because I am a moron. My colleagues had to solve the Sloet case, because I'm not a detective's arse. I can't read people any more. I have lost Carla, the only person... the only woman who still wanted anything to do with me. She's in love with the Missing Link. My son wants to have \"Parow Arrow\" tattooed on his arm, and I have no way to stop him, because I need to ask him to give me lessons about Wi-Fi hotspots and Twitter and Facebook and cellphone modems, so that I don't make more of a fool of myself than I already have. Like Saturday night, when I humiliated the woman I am half in love with, in front of her friends. And drove her back to drink. And now she won't answer me when I call. That's my reason to drink, Alexa, not the pile of crap you have deluded yourself about. Let go of my arm.'"
quote: "She clung to him even more tightly. 'Benny, why did you never say you were half in love with me?'"
quote: "'Because you are Xandra Barnard, and I am just a stupid policeman.'"
quote: "'Because I'm afraid you won't want me to touch you.'"
quote: "'Because to me you are so beautiful. And sexy, and smart. And deep. And arty-farty. When you're sober.'"
quote: "'Alexa, are we going to drink, or are we going to coo?'"
quote: "She looked at him with a deep tenderness, then she put her glass down and beckoned a waiter closer. 'Can you take all this away?'"
quote: "She turned to Griessel and she said, 'We are going to coo,' and tried to wrest the Jack Daniel's from his grip."
quote: "• Colonel Renier du Preez of the Directorate of Priority Crime Investigations, for the day that I could spend with the Cape Hawks. His and his team's professionalism, dedication, approachability, generosity, and patience made a strong impression on me, and left me with much greater insight (and respect for their incredible work). Thank you also to Assistant Commissioner Angie Bhuda, Colonel Giep Joubert, and Colonel Johan Schnetler of the DPCI in Pretoria for their time and trouble."
quote: "• Gavin Smith of Villiersdorp, gunsmith and master craftsman of silencers."
quote: "• The hospitable friendship of Daniel Cathiard of Château Smith Haut Lafitte, and the estate's cooper, Jean-Luc Itey."
quote: "• My wife, Anita, who makes everything possible with her love, tolerance, support, and sacrifice."
quote: "• Colonel Patrick Jacobs of the Bothasig SAPS station, Peet van Biljon, John Serfontein, and Sunell Lotter."
